A-level and GCSE students in England will be given grades estimated by their teachers, rather than by an algorithm, after a government U-turn.

It follows uproar after about 40% of A-level results were downgraded by exams regulator Ofqual, which used a formula based on schools' prior grades.

GCSE results in England, Wales and Northern Ireland come out on Thursday.

Ofqual chair Roger Taylor and Education Secretary Gavin Williamson apologised for the "distress" caused.

Teachers' estimates will be awarded to students unless the computer algorithm gave a higher grade.

Mr Williamson said the results of mock exams - which critics said can be inconsistent across different schools - will now not be a key part of the appeals process.

He said students and parents had been affected by "significant inconsistencies" with the grading process.

In a statement, he acknowledged the "extraordinarily difficult" year for students, after exams were cancelled due to the coronavirus pandemic.

He said the Department for Education had worked with Ofqual to design "the fairest possible model" but it had become clear that the process of awarding grades had resulted in "more significant inconsistencies than can be resolved through an appeals process".

"I am sorry for the distress this has caused young people and their parents but hope this announcement will now provide the certainty and reassurance they deserve," said Mr Williamson.

Can I accept a degree place and sit the exam? And other questions
How did the A-level algorithm work?
A-level results U-turn is 'too late' for students
BTec students: 'We've been forgotten about'
The education secretary told reporters No 10 does not get "any of the detailed data before schools do" but when it saw these "quite concerning outliers" they asked questions.

Mr Williamson said he hoped BTecs would be subject to teacher-assessed grades, and that the government was working with the "awarding authorities" to ensure this happened.

He also revealed the temporary cap on the number of places that universities can offer to students would be lifted.

'Days of confusion'
In a tweet, Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said the government had been "forced into a screeching U-turn after days of confusion".

He criticised Downing Street's handling of students' results as "a complete fiasco" and said its about-face was a "victory for the thousands of young people who have powerfully made their voices heard this past week".

A-level students held protests across the UK in response to grades they said were unfairly awarded.

Image copyrightREUTERS
Analysis by Hannah Richardson, education reporter
For the past decade, Ofqual has held the line against exam grade inflation like a knight of the realm - often using some quite controversial statistical techniques.

But in the case of the class of Covid-19, it could be said the government's desire to maintain standards came at too high a price.

In commissioning the exams regulator to take out an insurance policy in the form of its ill-fated algorithm, that policy arguably went too far, despite ministers' best intentions.

When First Minister Nicola Sturgeon reinstated estimated grades for students in Scotland, it was only a matter of time before the other nations followed suit.

Cue Northern Ireland, then Wales and finally England.

These students are all competing for the same university places, and in the same jobs market after all.

It was only when Education Secretary Gavin Williamson and his deputy Nick Gibb saw how inconsistent the results were that they were forced to relent.

However, the crisis is far from resolved, with tens of thousands of students who thought they had lost their university places likely to get the grades they need after all.

Universities say they will do their best to accommodate them, but it is going to be a tough ask.

After the algorithm - what happens next?
Ofqual chair Mr Taylor apologised for the "difficulty" caused to students over its grading system.

He told the BBC: "I would like to say sorry. We have recognised the difficulty that young people have faced coping with the receipt of grades that they were unable to understand the basis on which they had been awarded."


Media captionGavin Williamson: "Incredibly sorry for all those students who have been through this"
He added the regulator realised it had taken "the wrong road" and decided to "change course" after seeing the "anxiety" it had caused to young people and the added "administrative burden on teachers at a time when they need to be preparing for the new school term".

'Thankful and excited'
A-level student Jess Johnson, who stood to lose out on a £16,000 scholarship, said she was "thankful" and "excited" about the change to results.

The 18-year-old needed an A in English to earn a place at St Andrews, along with a £4,000-a-year scholarship, but she was downgraded from her predicted A to a B and was initially told she had been rejected.

That downgrading is now set to be reversed.

Ms Johnson, who studied at Ashton Sixth Form College in Greater Manchester, said: "I think it would have been unfair if (Northern) Ireland, Scotland and Wales made the change and we didn't, so I'm very glad."

However, she questioned why it had taken so long to make the change, after A-level results came out on Thursday, saying "a lot of stress and anxiety" had been caused as a result of the wait.

'I can finally breathe again'
Alaa Muhammad faced missing out on her dream of studying medicine after her A-level results were downgraded.

On hearing the news of the U-turn, she said: "I am ecstatic, I am so so happy. I was so hopeless a couple of days ago and now I feel like I can finally breathe again."

Ms Muhammad, from south-east England, had seen her grades fall from a predicted AAB to EED.

She said she had paid more than £2,000 to take re-sits at a private college after her studies in year 12 and 13 were disrupted. She now hopes she will be able to study medicine at a top university in Pakistan.

NI education minister in U-turn on A-level grades
Estimated results to be used for Welsh exam grades
Scottish school pupils have results upgraded
Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders (ASCL), welcomed the decision "to put an end to the grading fiasco".

He added the move would mean there was grade inflation, but he said this was a "small price to pay for remedying the manifest injustices" caused by the algorithm.

'Challenges for universities'
Alistair Jarvis, chief executive of Universities UK, said universities were being "as flexible as possible with applicants" but that the "late policy change" has created "challenges".

He called on the government to "step up and support universities", adding that Universities UK was seeking "urgent clarification" on a number of issues.

In a statement, the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (Ucas) said about 69% of 18-year old applicants across the UK were currently placed with their first-choice university, which it said was "higher than at the same point last year".

It said students who did not have places at their first or insurance choice of university did not need to make their decision immediately.

Ucas said it would be issuing new advice for students and schools, which would be sent directly to students, as soon as they were able to take a decision.

Widespread criticism
The government's handling of exam results has also been criticised by opposition parties and Conservative MPs.

Robert Halfon, the Tory chairman of the commons education select committee, said the government had "serious questions" to answer.

Speaking to the BBC's PM programme, he said he'd hoped No 10 would have developed with Ofqual a "clear, easy to understand [and] fair" system which allowed every pupil to appeal via their head teacher if they believed their grade was unfair.

He said he also hoped that Ofqual would explain its standardisation process to schools; but "none of this had happened" and there were now "serious questions about what on earth has gone on".

Layla Moran, the Liberal Democrats' education spokesperson, said that No 10 had been "dragged, kicking and screaming to this position" and that Mr Williamson "must go."

+

A-level students in England will be given grades estimated by their teachers, rather than by an algorithm, after a government U-turn. Here are some reactions from those who, amid the confusion, still don't know if they have lost their university places.

'This should have happened last week'
Image copyrightEMILY KING
Emily King doesn't feel much better about the government's decision, because "not that much has changed".

The 18-year-old from Whittlesey, Cambridgeshire, says being downgraded from a C to a U in A-level biology last week "really knocked my confidence" - and meant she was rejected from the University of Lincoln, where she had an offer to study midwifery.

Emily has emailed the university since the government announcement, but still doesn't know if she's in or not. She's got no other offers so will face a year out and will apply again next year if Lincoln say no. "I'd have to re-do that whole interview process again, which takes up a lot of time and a lot of money," she says.

Emily says she's not found much comfort in the idea of being awarded her predicted grades. "I'll always know that I was given a U. And I know that I didn't deserve that grade," she says.

"I'm pretty happy [about the U-turn] but also a bit annoyed. This should have happened last week. Or even a month ago."

'It's been horrific'
Image copyrightJOSH REID
Like Emily, Josh Reid is also repeatedly refreshing his inbox for email confirmation - but he has been told there will be a place for him to study theology at Oxford University's Regent's Park College - in line with his initial offer - once he's sent over his teacher assessed grades.

"I'm just completely over the moon. It's been just an utterly horrific few days in terms of stress and anxiety, just trying to get this all sorted. Just to finally have confirmation that our grades will be changed - it's such a relief," he says.

The 19-year-old, from Woking, says it was "frustrating" and "heart-breaking" to be downgraded last week. "I was so furious that I was getting these grades that in no way shape or form represented any of the work I had done over the past two years."

Although his place is more or less secure, Josh's anger hasn't abated. He says the government has had months to come up with an alternative way of grading students whose exams were cancelled because of the coronavirus pandemic.

"They've had five or six months to do it, and to get it so wrong - it just puts so much stress on students. And [the confusion] really just showed that, for whatever reason, the students weren't the priority."

'I still feel a bit let down'
Image copyrightZAINAB ALI
"I'm relieved but quite frustrated at the same time. It's too late," says Zainab Ali, 18, from London, minutes after hearing about the U-turn.

Zainab's predicted grades were an A* in history, an A in psychology, and a C in chemistry. But after she was given an A, B and a D on results day last week, she lost her place to study psychology at Queen Mary University of London - and was told the course had filled up.

"I'm facing the consequences for the indecisiveness of people who are in charge," Zainab says.

She'd come to terms with the fact that she's going to her second choice, the University of Westminster, instead - but still feels frustrated because she had "always wanted" to go to Queen Mary's since being a child. "It's just a very vibrant environment and I really had admired that. I just automatically fell in love," she says.

After first speaking to the BBC, Zainab says Queen Mary decided to offer her a place. The university said on Monday evening that it was "deeply sympathetic" to all students affected by the U-turn, and that applicants with revised grades will be guaranteed a place if they meet the terms of their original offer.

Although she is now likely to get her first choice of university after all, Zainab says the past week has been an "awful" and "confusing" experience. "I felt like I've been really let down. Now [after the U-turn] it's a bit different, but I still feel a bit let down after all of that. It was really, really stressful."

'I can keep my head up now'
Image copyrightCONNOR BRAGGER
Connor Bragger, 18, from Redditch, was given BCD last Thursday, and needed a BBB to get into a journalism course at Sheffield. He was predicted ABB so should, theoretically, be allowed to go now.

But tonight, he's disappointed to find the phone lines for the University of Sheffield's admissions office are closed - so despite the announcement, he doesn't know if he'll be heading there in September.

"Results day is [supposed to be] when you get answers - not more questions," Connor says.

His second choice is the University of Gloucestershire, where he has an unconditional offer. But now he's got the grades for Sheffield, he hopes he can go there.

Connor is trying to stay positive, and says he's pleased with the U-turn.

"There were two boxes that I was annoyed about not meeting, which was getting into my first choice, and getting grades I felt like I had earned. So even if I'm unable to get into my first choice, I feel as though I've now got results that I earned from my hard work all year. So if it doesn't all go to plan, I can still keep my head up a little bit higher."


Media captionA-level student Nina welcomes the government's U-turn which means she can train to become a vet
Making the best of an 'awful' situation
Image copyrightSAM THIER
Kath Burbidge's son Sam Thier is working a shift at B&Q near his home in Willsbridge, Bristol. At the same time, the 18-year-old is on the phone waiting his turn to speak to Cardiff University. He wants to see if they'll make space for him on the dentistry course he initially had an offer for, but was rejected last week as his predicted grades of A*AA were downgraded to BBB.

"I cried for 48 hours and didn't sleep after Thursday. I just feel so sorry for him," Kath says. "He's worked so hard on everything."

Sam's A* in chemistry meant Cardiff offered him a place on their chemistry Masters course. He'd just decided to accept it - and therefore handed in his notice at B&Q - when the news came through that his grades would be bumped up.

As she receives updates by text from Sam (he's now 20th in the queue), Kath wonders if he might take the chemistry offer instead.

"He's trying to just make the best of an awful, awful job that just never should have happened. Will he think 'I'll go and do chemistry now', just because he's fed up with the whole thing?"

+

Dewsbury family 'devastated' by brothers' drowning in sea
8 hours ago
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Image copyrightLANCASHIRE CONSTABULARY
Image caption
Muhammad Azhar Shabbir, left, and his brother Ali Athar Shabbir got into difficulty in the sea
The family of two brothers who drowned while on a trip to the Lancashire coast said they were "absolutely devastated".

Muhammad Azhar Shabbir, 18, and Ali Athar Shabbir, 16, got into difficulties after they were cut off by the tide at St Annes on Saturday.

Their 15-year-old cousin was with them and managed to swim ashore but the brothers were found dead on Sunday.

The family, from Dewsbury, West Yorkshire, said it was an "extremely difficult time".

"Everyone is absolutely devastated by what has happened to Muhammad Azhar and Ali Athar," they said in a statement.

"The boys were extremely well liked and a promising future has tragically been cut short."

More stories from across Yorkshire
The brothers had both studied at Upper Batley High School, with Ali due to pick up his GCSEs on Thursday and expected to get good results.

Head teacher Samantha Vickers said: "We're absolutely devastated as a community to lose two of our young men.

"I've been inundated with messages from staff and students alike. These were two really popular young men, intelligent, respectful, well-mannered and family oriented.

"It's a huge loss this, people are really reeling from the shock and finding it hard to believe."

Image copyrightSOUTHPORT OFFSHORE RESCUE TRUST
Image caption
Southport Offshore Rescue Trust said the youngsters had been cut off by the tide
The family were on a day trip when the three boys went into the water and got into difficulty.

The coastguard, RNLI and police called at about 18:40 BST and searches continued during the night and into the next day, using a drone and helicopter.

However, their bodies were found about a mile away from St Annes Pier on Sunday afternoon.

Nick Porter, a lifeboat coxswain with Southport Offshore Rescue Trust, said: "What started off as a family outing to the seaside on a nice day has turned into a tragedy.

"Our deepest sympathy goes out to them at this time."

Image caption
The family were one of many who had gone to the coast to enjoy the warm weather
Iqbal Bhana MBE, deputy lord lieutenant for West Yorkshire, said the incident showed why young people needed to be reminded how to stay safe around water.

"We've seen so many tragedies of such nature in our community where young men who feel they're indestructible go out into the sea, into the lakes," he said.

The brother's cousin, who has not been named, has been treated for hypothermia in hospital.

+

A-level students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland will have their grades based on teacher assessments rather than an algorithm, after uproar on last week's results day.
It follows a similar change in Scotland.
Teachers' grades will also be used for Thursday's GCSE results in England, and in Northern Ireland and Wales.
How were A-level grades originally decided?
Students in the UK did not sit exams this year because schools were closed following the coronavirus lockdown.
In England, A-level students were given grades by the official exam regulator, Ofqual.
Teachers were asked to supply for each pupil:
An estimated grade
A ranking compared with every other pupil in their class
These were put through an algorithm - or mathematical procedure. The biggest element in that was the school's performances in each subject over the previous three years.
The idea was that the grades this year - even without exams - would be consistent with how schools had done in the past.
The teachers' rankings would decide which pupils received the top grades in their particular school.
Labour call for urgent U-turn over 'exams fiasco'
What are BTec Nationals and how do they work?
Can I accept a degree place and sit the exam? And other questions
Why did the A-level algorithm say no?
Ofqual said this was a more accurate way of awarding grades than simply relying on teachers' assessments.
It argued that teachers were likely to be more generous in assigning an estimated mark, and this might lead to grade inflation - a much higher number of pupils getting the top grades.
Similar algorithms were applied for A-level pupils in Wales and Northern Ireland. They were also used in Scotland for the Scottish Higher qualification, which is broadly comparable with A-levels.
What happened?
When A-level grades were announced in England, Wales and Northern Ireland on 13 August, nearly 40% were lower than teachers' assessments.
There were similar issues in Scotland.
In England, 36% of entries had a lower grade than teachers recommended and 3% were down two grades.
What's more, the downgrading affected state schools much more than the private sector.
Chart showing proportion of grades changed
The prime minister defended the system as "robust", but there was widespread criticism from schools and colleges, as well as from the opposition and some Conservative MPs.
Why did some schools feel they had been treated unfairly?
Ofqual said that its objective for A-level results was to ensure that national results were "broadly similar to previous years".
However, by basing it so much around previous school performance, a bright student from an underperforming school was likely to have their results downgraded through no fault of their own.
Likewise, a school which was in the process of rapid improvement would not have seen this progress reflected in results.
In Scotland, figures showed that the Scottish Higher pass rate for pupils from the most deprived backgrounds was reduced by 15.2 percentage points, compared with only 6.9 percentage points for the wealthiest pupils.
Why did it benefit private schools?
Private schools are usually selective - and better-funded - and in most years will perform well in terms of exam results. An algorithm based on past performance will put students from these schools at an advantage compared with their state-educated equivalents.
There was a further factor at work according to statisticians Philip Nye and Dave Thompson of FFT Education Datalab. They said class sizes in independent schools are usually significantly smaller than in state schools.
graph
Where there were fewer than five pupils studying a subject at a school, their grades were decided only on the basis of teachers' estimates.
Where there were between five and 15 entrants for a subject, teachers' assessments would still be given more weight.
Were there other protections in place?
A-level students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland all had their original grades informed by algorithms.
However, some other protections were in place or later added:
In Wales the final mark could not be lower than a pupil's grade at AS-level, which are taken the year before A-levels. They count towards 40% of the final grade.
In England, students unhappy with their grades were told they could appeal using mock results or sit exams in the autumn
In Scotland, after criticism over the Higher results, the government reverted to teacher assessed grades.
What happens next?
It isn't entirely clear yet.
Some students will now have higher grades, so might consider looking at different universities or colleges. The process for doing so hasn't been outlined in full and pupils should keep in contact with their schools and Ucas, the university admissions system.
Ucas has said that more than two-thirds of pupils already had their first choice of university before the government U-turn happened.
However, they add that for those who now have the grades to get into their first choice, their first step should be to speak to their school and then the university they want to go to.
Alistair Jarvis, the head of the university body Universities UK, has said they "will do everything they can" to help students over the next few days. However, he has also highlighted the "challenges" facing universities, such as capacity, staffing and facilities.
It also means that this year will see a considerable amount of grade inflation, the main reason the algorithm was introduced in the first place.
Grade inflation is when grades increase substantially, making it difficult to compare one year with another. This can cause problems, because students from this year might compete with students from previous years for jobs, apprenticeships or university places.

+

Growing up, I remember my whole body tensing every time I heard my father's key in the back door.

What mood would he be in when he came home from work? Would he provoke an argument? Would it lead to him hitting me, whipping me with his belt or just slapping me round the back of my head?

I was fortunate I could escape sometimes to my best friend's house down the road to get out of his way.

And the next day my father would go to work again, and I'd go to school, which meant respite from the disruptive shouting and cruel violence.

The love in our lives came from my amazing mum who did everything she could to make up for his failings.

This article contains descriptions of violence some readers may find disturbing.

Image caption
Me as a child growing up in Lancashire
When the prime minister told us all to stay at home because of coronavirus, one of my first thoughts was for those living in abusive households - women, men and children, essentially trapped, forced to stay inside week after week. What would happen to them?

Spending the last few months finding out about the reality of domestic abuse under lockdown has been shocking - but I've also met women who've courageously escaped during the most challenging circumstances.

I've spent time inside refuges which were full, meeting support workers on the ground who were under pressure, and talking to people who were subjected to levels of abuse they often hadn't experienced before.

Jess* had been with her violent husband for many years. During their relationship he'd assaulted her multiple times - punching her, strangling her, controlling what she wore and how she styled her hair.

She says she had to ask his permission to make a cup of tea and even go to the loo. But when lockdown was imposed, the violence escalated to more extreme levels.

Like most of us, Jess and her husband were watching Boris Johnson as he instructed the nation to stay at home to stop the spread of Covid-19. It was then that he turned to her and said chillingly, 'Let the games begin'.

Her story is one of the most brutal I've ever heard.

She told me he raped her more than a hundred times. "Curtains would get closed, TV would be up loud, front door would be locked, music would be turned up so nobody could hear me screaming," she recalls. He burned the top of her legs with cigarettes 'so no-one would ever want her'.

BBC Panorama has learned the intensity of abuse escalated in lockdown - offences included poisoning and strangulation.

Women's Aid has been working on the first in-depth research project about the effect confinement had on domestic abuse. Of the people they spoke to, almost two-thirds of those living with their abuser said the violence got worse, and three-quarters said lockdown had made it harder for them to escape.

Meanwhile, calls to the Respect Men's Advice Line for male victims increased by 65% during the first three months of restrictions.

For some, the pandemic was used by their abuser as a form of control.

When I asked Jess what the 'stay at home' message meant to her, she simply said: "Death."

Three weeks into lockdown her husband declared 'today will be the last day you see daylight'. She knew she had to get out or she feared she'd be leaving her home "in a wooden box".

Image caption
For me school was a respite from my father's violence
When I was around 12 years old, I remember running to the police station after my father locked my mum in their bedroom and began beating her up.

I was scared he was going to kill her.

Our phone had been cut off because he hadn't paid the bill - another way of trying to isolate us from friends and family.

I ran as fast as I could the mile or so to the station and, out of breath, pleaded with the officer behind the desk to come and help.

But in lockdown, some of those in violent relationships struggled to even pick up the phone to dial 999, let alone run for help, because their abuser was at home 24/7.

Jess knew she had to get through to the police somehow in order to save her life, but she couldn't alert her husband.

While he slept on the sofa, she googled 'how to contact the police without calling them', terrified he would wake up. After texting REGISTER to 999 and receiving an initial response, she sent them her address. Officers arrived within minutes.

Panorama has found in the first seven weeks of UK lockdown someone called police for help about domestic abuse every 30 seconds - that's both female and male victims.


Media captionI returned to the house where I grew up, for the first time in 35 years, for BBC Panorama
It took the Westminster government 19 days after imposing restrictions to announce a social media campaign to encourage people to report domestic abuse, as well as an extra £2m for domestic abuse helplines.

Fiona Dwyer, chief executive of Solace, one of the biggest providers of refuge spaces told me, "the government's inaction and slowness to respond made an incredibly challenging period even more challenging".

"If you look at who was in the Cabinet, it's a lot of very privileged men. So maybe it's not an issue they think about," she says.

I haven't met one survivor, charity worker or domestic abuse advocate in the last few months who said they had seen any evidence the government in England had considered the effect lockdown would have on those living in an abusive household.

But safeguarding minister Victoria Atkins denied they were too slow to act. The government was "alive to the risks of domestic abuse", was talking to charities in the early days and "very much responding" she told me.

Image caption
Women told me Covid-19 had been used against them as a form of control
In the nearly three weeks between the introduction of lockdown and the government launching its You Are Not Alone campaign, 11 women, two children and one man were killed in alleged domestic abuse cases.

Responsibility for those deaths lies with the perpetrators, but could lives have been saved had the government acted more quickly?

"There will be time to reflect on lessons to be learned across the pandemic", Ms Atkins told me. She said she was working to scrap the October deadline requiring charities to spend the emergency government funding they received.

Stopping lockdown domestic abuse on my street

Domestic abuse victims to get better protection in family courts

Jess had to leave her home and her only option was to try to find a place in a refuge. Her life since she arrived at one in Wales run by the charity Llamau has been transformed - thanks to support from the dedicated staff and caring fellow survivors.

The UK potentially faces a further coronavirus spike and more local lockdowns as we head towards winter. Solace's Fiona Dwyer said the UK government has to make sure there is "robust sustainable funding for future services".

My parents got divorced when I was 16 and that's when we escaped the violence. But not all domestic abuse survivors leave their home. Why should they have to? Others can't because they are terrified their abuser will come after them; many simply can't afford to go because they aren't financially independent.

For those like Jess who did take that step during lockdown, it has been liberating. "I feel safe. I don't feel threatened. I can go to bed at night knowing nothing's going to happen to me."

If you've been affected by domestic violence you can get help by calling the National Domestic Abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247 and in Scotland 0800 027 1234. There is also the Respect Men's Advice Line on 0808 801 0327.

*Not her real name

You can watch BBC Panorama 'Escaping my Abuser' on BBC One at 19:30 BST and on BBC iPlayer.

+

State officials in Australia have apologised for their failures over the handling of a huge Covid-19 outbreak on the Ruby Princess cruise ship.

Last week, an inquiry found New South Wales health authorities made "serious mistakes" in allowing about 2,650 passengers to disembark when the ship docked in Sydney in March.

Those people were not tested for the virus, despite suspected cases aboard.

The ship was ultimately linked to at least 900 infections and 28 deaths.

Prior to Australia's second wave of the virus - which emerged in Melbourne in June - the cruise ship had been the source of Australia's biggest coronavirus cluster.

NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian said she was particularly sorry to the 62 people who had caught the virus from passengers who disembarked.

"I can't imagine what it would be like having a loved one - or being someone yourself who continues to suffer and experience trauma as a result - and I want to apologise unreservedly," she said.

What mistakes were made?
After completing an 11-day return cruise to New Zealand, passengers were allowed to leave the ship at Sydney Harbour and catch public transport, and domestic and overseas flights home.

An inquiry report released last Friday found NSW Health had mischaracterised the ship as low-risk, and should have tested sick patients immediately.

It was "inexcusable" that officials had failed to immediately obtain results from coronavirus swab tests taken on 19 March - the day the vessel docked.

However the inquiry found no systemic failures and said the mistakes had already been recognised by the state government.

How did Australia's cruise ship debacle happen?
Where are the world's coronavirus hotspots?
European countries fight coronavirus surge
Following the Ruby Princess debacle, at least a dozen other cruise ships were banned from docking at Australian ports due to their virus risk.

Most of the Australian passengers on the Ruby Princess self-isolated at home, in line with government instructions for returning travellers.

Excluding a cluster in the island state of Tasmania which spread through a hospital system, 62 people in Australia became infected through secondary transmissions.

Ms Berejiklian singled out those cases in her apology, saying: "Unfortunately in particular for those 62 individuals, the lessons weren't learnt soon enough."

At least a third of passengers - or around 950 people - were from overseas.

The inquiry said it was not able to fully assess how many people had caught the virus because many were unable to get tested.

+

Lockdown widened learning gaps between richer and poorer primary school children, an analysis of thousands of families in England suggests.

Children from poorer families did at least one hour less learning a day compared with those in richer families, the Institute of Fiscal Studies found.

One head teacher says it could take up to two years to bring some children back to their correct attainment level.

The government said a £350m tutoring scheme would help disadvantaged pupils.

'There's already a gap'
The IFS surveyed the parents of 5,500 school-aged children in England during lockdown. It compared the richest 20% of pupils with the poorest 20%.

In May, the IFS said children from wealthier families were spending more time studying during the pandemic than poorer children. And in its latest research, the think tank gives a more detailed picture of how coronavirus has widened the gap between the richest and poorest primary school children.

Its findings suggest richer primary school children spent 75 minutes a day more on educational activities, compared with those in poorer families during lockdown.

Data from five years ago suggested there was no gap in learning time among primary school pupils.

Image caption
Kirsty Tennyson says some of her children now have a "mountain to climb"
Resources provided by schools are also unequally distributed, the IFS suggested. Around 42% of poorer primary-aged children received some sort of online lesson, conference call or support from their school, compared to 58% of richer children.

And the IFS said it found evidence suggesting children who have had better access to learning resources are also more likely to spend more time learning than children who do not.

Richer children were (37%) more likely to have their own space to study than their poorer counterparts. And although a large majority of children from all backgrounds had access to a computer or tablet, richer children were also more likely to have access to a computer or tablet.

School catch up: No such thing as a free launch
How will pupils catch up?
A third of pupils 'not engaging with set work'
What are the risks of opening schools?
Kirsty Tennyson is Executive Principal of the Three Saints Academy Trust and one of her schools is St Mary and St Thomas C of E in St Helens. More than 60% of the children are on free school meals and nearly half have a special need.

"In a deprived area there is already a gap that we're striving to close - to narrow and ultimately to close [the gap]," she says. "Children who have not got that support at home and have not been able to access that learning - that gap will have grown hugely."

Ms Tennyson says her schools have detailed plans for the start of term to help the children catch up, but she admits there is a "mountain to climb".

"This is going to take into this academic year and the one after to really get those children back to where they need to be and for some children it will take longer."

Image caption
Phoebe was a Year 6 pupil at St Mary and St Thomas
Phoebe is 11 years old and starts secondary school next month. She was using the home learning packs her school, St Mary and St Thomas, provided until she want back to school in June.

"I do struggle with maths so I have been worried if I do go down," she says of her learning.

Her dad, George, is a single parent and says he has worked hard - with assistance from the school - to help Phoebe with her school work.

"I failed in maths," he says. "The school helped me get my English qualification. If I don't know [the work], I can't help my child." He added: "Phoebe's school has always helped because they're always on the end of the phone."

Last month, the Department for Education announced a national tutoring programme, including £350m of funding for additional targeted support for children and young people aged 5-19 years who are most in need of help.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the fund would help head teachers provide what pupils need.

A spokesman said "being in school is vital for children's education and wellbeing, which is why making sure all pupils return to the classroom in September is a national priority".

+

People with underlying health conditions say they have mixed emotions as shielding ends for about 130,000 in Wales.

Those most vulnerable to Covid-19 had been asked to stay inside since the beginning of the pandemic.

Richard Bluck, 37, is so vulnerable he says he may not be able to hug his daughter until a vaccine is found.

People who were shielding are advised to pay strict attention to physical distancing and good hand hygiene.

And the Welsh Government has said the situation could change again in future if cases begin to rise.

But some groups are concerned pausing shielding from Sunday is too much of a risk, with transplant patients told by the Renal Association and Kidney Care UK to "ignore government advice" about ceasing to shield.

The Welsh Government advised those people to speak to their doctor.

Gething sorry shield letters went to wrong address
Transplant patients told 'keep shielding'
'Isolation felt like a parallel universe, but I'm scared to leave'
Two-thirds shielding happy to return to work
Mr Bluck, who has cystic fibrosis (CF) and underwent a double lung transplant in 2018, has been shielding since early March.

His eight-year-old daughter Evelyn lives with his ex-wife, who is a nurse.

"It might be when a vaccine is found that'll be the next time I'll hug my daughter," he said.

"The hardest part of the initial lockdown was not being able to see my daughter at all for quite a long time."

Image copyrightRICHARD BLUCK
Image caption
Richard Bluck, pictured with his daughter before the pandemic, says Evelyn mostly understands the situation
He added: "Even when the lockdown finished, Evelyn came over to visit me in the garden but that was still at a distance and that's a really unnatural thing, no hugs and playing and talking at a distance.

"When she turned eight in July, it was really strange not giving your daughter a cuddle on her birthday. So that's been the toughest part of all this."

Mr Bluck said his daughter mostly understands why their contact is so limited.

"It's so hard to say but it could cost me my life.

"A child's mind won't think forward in time like an adult does and there are tears and emotions from both of us.

"I'm just honest with her and explain what would happen to daddy if I caught the virus.

"Because she's seen me close to death before, she knows I've had a second chance of life.

"She'd never forgive herself if she thought she could be responsible for her father's death, is basically what it comes down to. So I don't want to put her in that situation."

Image copyrightRICHARD BLUCK
Image caption
Richard Bluck's only chance of survival was a transplant
Mr Bluck, from Llysworney in Vale of Glamorgan, has lived with CF from birth and is on immunosuppressive therapy - which lowers his immune response to stop it from damaging or rejecting transplanted organs.

He almost died before his transplant, with his lung function decreasing as his CF worsened throughout his 30s. By March 2018, he was hospitalised at Llandough in Cardiff and remained there for six months until he was taken to the Harefield Hospital in London, the largest specialist heart and lung centre in the UK.

"My left lung had started to disintegrate and the infection was leaking out of the lungs and into the blood stream which caused sepsis.

"I also suffered a small heart attack. My only chance of survival was a transplant."

Image copyrightRICHARD BLUCK
Image caption
Richard Bluck almost died but was lucky he was able to receive a double lung transplant quickly
Mr Bluck was only on the waiting list for two weeks before a suitable set of lungs became available and he was able to have the transplant.

"It gave me a second chance of life, so for me to be impetuous and say let's forget about this virus for a moment isn't worth the risk.

"I know some people find it very difficult and they will take that risk, but what I've experienced, I feel this is the only sensible option, so Evelyn can have her father around for a lot longer."

Mr Bluck has been working from home and will continue to do so after shielding ends - meaning he can choose to continue to shield.

"I know a lot of people will think 'thank god for that, I'm off on holiday, maybe even abroad', which is fair enough but for me personally the risk is still there, the virus is still out there."

Image copyrightCWM TAF MORGANNWG UNIVERSITY HEALTH BOARD
Image caption
Badges with the image of a yellow shield are being distributed across the NHS in Wales
Age Cymru is conducting a survey on how older people feel about ceasing to shield, and said it had received a mixed response.

Chief executive Victoria Lloyd said: "Many older people are looking forward to coming out of shielding so they can visit more places and see more people.

"However, we know that many are concerned about re-engaging with their communities. This concern seems to be fuelled by reports of people gathering in large numbers or not following government guidance.

"Others have told us that they have lost their self-confidence and are worried about mixing with others in shopping centres or on public transport."

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
People who are shielding are being sent letters updating them on the latest situation
The charity is urging supermarkets to retain designated times for vulnerable people so they can continue shopping during quieter times, and that priority food and pharmaceutical deliveries should remain.

Frank Atherton, Wales' Chief Medical Officer, said: "At the moment we're seeing very few new cases in Wales and that means we have scope now to say to the most vulnerable people... they can start to reengage with society, start to get back to their normal lives."

He said anybody coming out of shielding had a very low chance of coming into contact with coronavirus - and there was a window of opportunity in the warm weather while transmissions were low.

"I'm very grateful to those people who have been in the shielding group, they've been protecting themselves and they've been protecting the NHS by not getting sick.

"They will naturally be very anxious about coming out, we need to make sure that we support people in their ability to do that.

"We mustn't underestimate the mental health consequences of being tucked away and not able to engage with people."

He said the situation may change as winter approaches.

+

Coronavirus: Poorer children's education could take 'over a year' to recover

Coronavirus: Poorer children's education could take 'over a year' to recover
Close
The BBC has gained access inside a school in St Helens, in which more than 60% of pupils receive free school meals.

Children and their parents spoke about the educational struggles they face and the ways coronavirus has made these worse.

The CEO of the Three Saints Academy Trust, Kirsty Tennyson, says the gap in educational inequalities will have grown hugely during lockdown.

She says it will take well over a year – and even longer in some cases – to bring poorer children back to the academic level they should be at.

This comes as new figures show that primary school children from the poorest families in England were doing over an hour less learning each day in lockdown, compared with children from richer families, according to the Institute of Fiscal Studies.

The Department for Education said a £350m tutoring scheme would help disadvantaged pupils, and that during lockdown the government provided more than 200,000 laptops and tablets to vulnerable children and those preparing for exams.

+

Travellers entering the UK from France and the Netherlands will face a 14-day quarantine when they arrive from Saturday.
Transport Secretary Grant Shapps said the measure - which also applies to people travelling from Monaco, Malta, Turks and Caicos, and Aruba - would start at 04:00 BST.
The UK government's decision follows a surge in cases in the countries affected in recent days.
Which other countries are no longer exempt from quarantine?
People arriving in the UK from Belgium, the Bahamas and Andorra, were recently told they also have to self-isolate. Spain and Luxembourg have also come off the exemption list.
The full list of countries exempt from quarantine rules has been updated regularly.
You don't need to self-isolate if you travel through a non-exempt country, as long as you don't stop in the country to get out of the car and no one else gets in.
Or if you are on public transport, you are exempt from quarantine if no new passengers get on while in the non-exempt country and no passenger mixes with people outside or enters a public space at a stop.
What are the quarantine rules?
The government has published a list of ''lower risk'' countries that can be visited without the need to self-isolate on returning to England.
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland can make their own quarantine rules, but they are usually similar.
Travellers from affected countries - including UK nationals - are asked to provide an address where they will self-isolate for 14 days. They can be fined £100 for failing to provide these details.
One in five eligible passengers will be called or texted to check they are following the rules.
People who do not self-isolate can be fined up to £1,000 in England, Wales and Northern Ireland and £480 in Scotland. There are fines up to £5,000 for persistent offenders.
Cala Aiguablava Beach, near Girona in SpainIMAGE COPYRIGHTREUTERS
image captionTravellers entering the UK from Spain have to self-isolate
Passengers should drive their own car to their destination if possible. If they don't provide an address, the government will arrange accommodation at the traveller's expense.
Once at their destination, they must not use public transport or taxis during the quarantine period. They must also not go to work, school, or public areas, or have visitors except for essential support.
Nor are they allowed to go out to buy food, or other essentials, if they can rely on others.
People returning from overseas will not be automatically eligible for statutory sick pay during this period, unless they meet the required conditions - for example, displaying coronavirus symptoms.
Why did the rules change for France and Spain?
You finally got abroad, but was it worth it?
Which countries don't have to quarantine?
Anyone arriving from the Common Travel Area (CTA) - the Republic of Ireland, the Channel Islands, or the Isle of Man - does not have to enter quarantine, if they have been in the CTA for at least 14 days.
Travellers from more than 50 countries deemed ''low risk'' do not have to quarantine, with a further five countries - Estonia, Latvia, Slovakia, Slovenia and St Vincent and the Grenadines added to the list on 28 July. These are known as ''travel corridors'' although some of these countries will impose restrictions on travellers entering from the UK.

media captionCoronavirus: How to fly during a global pandemic
Health measures including quarantine rules are set by each UK nation separately - although Wales has adopted the same exemptions as England. Since 10 July, Scotland's quarantine measures have also been eased, as have Northern Ireland's.
You can check the government's advice on individual countries here.
Airline employee wearing a face maskIMAGE COPYRIGHTGETTY IMAGES
Which workers are exempt from quarantine?
There are a number of people who are exempt, regardless of their country of origin, including:
Road haulage and freight workers
Seasonal agricultural workers if they self-isolate where they are working
UK residents who ordinarily travel overseas at least once a week for work
Fruit picker picking strawberriesIMAGE COPYRIGHTPA MEDIA
image captionSeasonal agricultural workers are exempt if they self-isolate where they are working
Do other countries have quarantine rules?
Travellers could find they also have to enter quarantine when they arrive in another country, even if they do not have to quarantine in the UK on their return. Some countries have introduced screening measures like temperature checks, and entry restrictions. For example:
New Zealand has barred almost all foreign travellers
Australia requires an exemption visa if you are not a resident or a citizen and everyone entering the country needs to quarantine for 14 days
South Korea requires all arrivals to be tested and to isolate for 14 days
Adult visitors to Iceland can either pay for a test or go into quarantine
Anyone who has been in the UK in the previous 14 days is not currently allowed to enter Japan.

+

Coronavirus in the UK: How many confirmed cases are there in your area?
7 hours ago
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsCoronavirus pandemic
Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
There have been more than 319,000 confirmed cases of coronavirus so far in the UK and over 41,000 people have died, government figures show. However, these numbers include only people tested, and the actual death toll is higher.

Here we a take a look at some of the key figures of the pandemic in the UK - estimates of the death toll and number of cases. You can also find out more about cases in your area using our search tool below.

Find out how the pandemic has affected your area and how it compares with the national average (last updated 16 August).

How many cases and deaths in your area?
Enter a full UK postcode, English, Welsh or Northern Irish council name, or Scottish health board name to find out

Type in 3 or more characters for results.

If you can't see the look-up click here.

Rise in new cases amid concern over hotspots
Daily confirmed cases are starting to edge up again after they fell significantly from their April peak as a result of lockdown restrictions imposed a month earlier.

In July, the Prime Minister Boris Johnson had said the government needed to "squeeze that brake pedal" and postponed the easing of some lockdown rules in England.

However, businesses such as bowling alleys, soft play centres and casinos reopened at the weekend, along with permission for beauty treatments such as eyebrow threading, facials and make-up. The easing also allowed small wedding receptions and live indoor performances to resume.

On Monday, the government said there had been 713 newly confirmed cases.

However, the number of tests being carried out is also increasing - and these tests are targeted at areas where infection rates are highest.

As BBC health correspondent Nick Triggle points out, if you are testing more, you are likely to find more cases.

If you look at the percentage of tests coming back positive, the rise in cases becomes marginal, once daily fluctuations are taken into account, he says.

Separate data released from the Office of National Statistics (ONS), which surveys a sample of households in England for current infection - not including care homes or hospitals - also suggests that coronavirus cases are stable across most of England.

READ MORE HERE: Is the UK in a better position than we think?
The UK does, however, currently have a number of local hotspots of the virus, which was first confirmed in the UK in January.

Last week Newark and Sherwood was added to the list of places, many in the north-west of the country, where lockdown measures have been re-introduced. Eden in Cumbria was removed.

In Scotland, a local lockdown has been imposed in Aberdeen.

A Covid-19 watchlist is produced by Public Health England, based on an assessment of incidence rates, and other indicators such as trends in testing, healthcare activity and deaths.

Decline in daily deaths
While the number of new confirmed cases of coronavirus is rising again, government-announced deaths have continued to fall since a peak in mid-April.

On Monday the government reported just three further deaths - all in England - with no deaths recorded in Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland.

Last week the government's death toll in England was reduced by 5,340 following a review of the way coronavirus deaths are counted.

New rules mean deaths anywhere in the UK are included in the coronavirus total only if they occurred within 28 days of a positive test. Previously in England, all deaths after a positive test were included.

Prof John Newton, director of health improvement at Public Health England, said: "The way we count deaths in people with Covid-19 in England was originally chosen to avoid underestimating deaths caused by the virus in the early stages of the pandemic."

But he said the new method of calculating deaths from the virus would give "crucial information about both recent trends and overall mortality burden due to Covid-19".

New weekly totals giving the number of deaths in England within 60 days of a positive test will also be released. Deaths occurring after this time will also be added to the total if Covid-19 is mentioned on the death certificate.

England has seen the majority of UK deaths from Covid-19. Using the 28-day cut-off, there have been just under 37,000.

Coronavirus in Scotland: Key figures and trends
What do the stats tell us in Wales?
EASY STEPS: How to keep safe
A SIMPLE GUIDE: What are the symptoms?
GETTING READY: How prepared is the UK?
TRIBUTES: The stories of those who died
IN-DEPTH: Coronavirus pandemic
Overall death toll could be more than 60,000
When looking at the overall death toll from coronavirus, official figures count such deaths in three different ways.

Government figures count people who tested positive for coronavirus and died within 28 days.

But the ONS publishes weekly updates using two other measures.

The first includes all deaths where coronavirus was mentioned on the death certificate, even if the person had not been tested for the virus. The latest figures using this measure suggest there had been more than 56,000 deaths by 31 July.

The ONS also looks at all UK deaths over and above the number usually expected for the time of year - known as excess deaths. The latest figures for this measure show the death toll was just under 64,000 by 31 July.

In recent weeks, figures used in this third measure have actually been falling.

This is because the number of deaths from all causes registered in a single week - including coronavirus - has now stayed below the five-year average for seven weeks in a row.

Of the deaths registered in England and Wales in the week to 31 July, 193 involved coronavirus, or just 2.2% of the total of 8,946.

Figures released by the ONS at the end of July show that England had the highest levels of excess deaths in Europe between the end of February and the middle of June.

Some areas of Spain and Italy were harder hit than UK cities. But ONS analysis shows the epidemic in the UK was more widespread than in other countries. Scotland saw the third highest death rate in Europe - behind England and Spain. Wales was in fifth place and Northern Ireland in eighth.

The government has argued it is too soon to make definitive international comparisons but, as the impact of the first wave becomes clear in many countries, analysis is beginning to suggest the UK has been the hardest hit of the leading G7 nations.

England highest level of excess deaths in Europe
What is the R number in the UK?
The "R number" is the average number of people an infected person will pass the disease on to.

If R is below one, then the number of people contracting the disease will fall; if it is above one, the number will grow.

The current estimate by the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, known as Sage, for the R number across the whole of the UK is between 0.8 and 1.0 as of 14 August.

The estimate for England is between 0.8 and 1.0, while for Scotland it is between 0.6 and 1.0. The estimate for Wales is 0.7-0.9.

In Northern Ireland, it is between 1.2 and 2.0.

While the government has said in the past that the R number is one of the most important factors in deciding when lockdown measures can be eased, it now says these estimates do not fully represent current infection levels.

Sage says it is no longer confident R is below 1 in England. It says models using testing data, rather than epidemiological data such as hospital admissions, to predict transmission rates are suggesting higher values for R and these are likely to be reflected in the coming weeks.

+

Coronavirus: How will the world vaccinate seven billion?
By Naomi Grimley
Global affairs correspondent
13 August 2020
 708commentsShare this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsCoronavirus pandemic
Image copyrightREUTERS
Teams across the world are working to develop a vaccine that will be effective against Covid-19.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson has called it "the most urgent shared endeavour of our lifetimes".

But away from the high-tech science of finding a winning formula, what about the logistics of rolling out a vaccine to seven billion people worldwide?

In the UK, the heart of that effort is at the Harwell Science Campus, on an ex-RAF airbase in Oxfordshire.

It is going to be the UK's Vaccines Manufacturing and Innovation Centre (VMIC), plans for which have been brought forward by Covid-19.

"We've really compressed the timeline into almost half. So whereas we were expecting to have it ready at the end of 2022, we're now hoping to have it online in 2021," explains Matthew Duchars, chief executive of VMIC.

'Like baking a cake'
Mr Duchars is yet to take a summer holiday because he knows that this place could end up producing the Oxford University vaccine. He's in constant touch with the team at the Jenner Institute, just down the road in Oxford.

Image copyrightVMIC
Image caption
Construction of the UK's Vaccines Manufacturing and Innovation Centre has been brought forward
He says it's a heavy responsibility.

"It's critically important, not just for the country but globally, to be able to produce these types of vaccines quickly and effectively," he says.

"To use an analogy - it's like baking a cake at home. You can spend hours preparing the perfect cake and now you've got to go out and bake 70 million of them and they all have to be perfect, so it's quite a challenge."

That's putting it mildly.

Coronavirus vaccine: When will we have one?
Oxford vaccine triggers immune response
Encouraging results in vaccine trials
Oxford University has already had to secure enough temporary lab space to start manufacturing its vaccine now, even before it knows the results of its global trials.

Ultimately, the human race will need to make billions of doses of several types of Covid-19 vaccines. They will all have to be manufactured, distributed and administered across the globe.

The international vaccines alliance - Gavi - is urging countries to start thinking about vaccine rollout now.

But it's not easy to get international co-operation, because many rich countries are already doing bilateral deals with drug companies to make sure they can secure supplies if the magic formula is found.

Overcoming self-interest
Seth Berkley, Gavi's CEO, says one of the biggest hurdles he's facing is so-called "vaccine nationalism".

"I think we need all countries to be thinking about this in a globally minded way, partially because it's the right thing to do but also because it's a self-interest issue," he says.

"If you have large reservoirs of virus circulating in surrounding countries, you can't go back to your normal trade, travel or movement of people. It's really important to have that mindset: we're not safe, unless everybody is safe."

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Human trials of the Oxford vaccine are taking place in South Africa
As well as trying to make sure developing countries get access to the right vaccines, Mr Berkley has to think about the more prosaic aspects of vaccine roll-out, including whether or not there are enough glass vials in the world. There have been reports of a potential bottleneck in medical glass production.

"We were worried about that," Mr Berkley admits, "so we went ahead and purchased enough vials for two billion doses, that's the number of doses we hope to have ready by the end of 2021."

If glass vials are a potential problem, then so are fridges, since most vaccines need to be kept at low temperatures.

Keeping it cold
Prof Toby Peters, an expert in cold chain logistics at Birmingham University, is helping organisations like Gavi think about how they can maximise existing refrigeration capacity in developing countries.

He says: "It's not just a vaccine fridge, it's actually all the other pieces too: the pallets which move it in the planes; the vehicles that move it to the local stores, and then the motorbikes and the people who take it out right into the communities. All these have to work seamlessly."

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Many more glass vials will be needed - and fridges to store them
Prof Peters has been talking to global food and drink companies to explore borrowing cold chain storage to help with this mammoth project.

To make the vaccine roll-out more manageable, countries will have to work out who to prioritise in their populations.

Who's first in line?
Dr Charlie Weller, head of vaccines at the UK's Wellcome Trust, says countries are going to have to ask some frank questions.

"Who needs this vaccine? Which are the highest risk groups? And who are the highest priority? Because what we're pretty clear about is any initial vaccine is likely to outstrip supply, so choices will need to be made."

Even doing the actual vaccinations will be tricky.

The UK, for example, is looking at a template which uses its network of polling stations as a way to process the population. But for poorer countries it's even more daunting.

Dr Weller insists strong healthcare systems will be key, with healthcare workers who have the right technical skills to immunise the target groups.

The scientists all think some kind of vaccine will be found. But many of them say they are kept awake at night by the sheer scale of what needs to be done to get it to billions of people.

+

Coronavirus: What are the UK's travel rules and which countries can you visit?
By Eleanor Lawrie
BBC News

Published3 days ago
Related Topics
Coronavirus pandemic
Tourists in CroatiaIMAGE COPYRIGHTGETTY IMAGES
People planning to go abroad have been warned "no travel is risk-free", and they should factor in potentially having to self-isolate for 14 days upon their return.
Quarantine restrictions have been reintroduced for people entering the UK from France, from 04:00 BST on 15 August, directly affecting about 160,000 British tourists.
Travellers arriving from several other countries, including Spain, also have told to self-isolate on arrival.
How does the government decide which countries go on the quarantine list?
The decision is triggered when a country's rate of infection exceeds 20 cases per 100,000 people over seven days. Transport Secretary Grant Shapps told BBC Breakfast France had reached 20.5.
The Joint Biosecurity Centre (JBS) - set up by the government to monitor coronavirus - advises which countries should be on the quarantine list, and which should be exempt.
It considers:
an estimate of the proportion of the population that is currently infectious
trends in incidence and deaths
transmission status
information on a country's testing capacity
Why did the quarantine rules change for France and Spain?
In June, a two-week quarantine was brought in for most people entering the UK from overseas.
In July, the government published a list of more than 50 countries exempted from the rules because of their lower coronavirus rates.
But quarantine restrictions have been reapplied to several countries since then:
15 August - France, Netherlands, Malta, Monaco, Turks & Caicos, Aruba
8 August- Belgium, Andorra, Bahamas
31 July - Luxembourg
27 July - Spain
The decision that travellers from France and other countries would have to go into quarantine followed a "significant change" in the risk of contracting Covid-19, the Department for Transport said.
It added that there had been a 66% increase in newly-reported cases per 100,000 people in France since last Friday.
Spain was removed from the list of exempt countries in July following "a significant change... in both the level and pace" of coronavirus cases, the UK government said.
The Covid-19 infection rate in Spain has continued to rise, and in the first two weeks of August saw 110 cases per 100,000, according to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, while the UK's rate is 17.3.
Infections surge in France, Germany and Spain
Chart showing number of cases in popular destinations
In Luxembourg and Belgium, which have been removed from the list, two-week rates per 100,000 people stand at 122.5 and 58.7 respectively.
The list is kept under constant review, and the government says it ''will not hesitate'' to remove more countries if conditions worsen.
Where can I go without quarantining when I get back?
Travellers are exempt from quarantine if they arrive in England, Wales and Northern Ireland from countries that - according to the government - pose a "reduced risk" from coronavirus.
Brunei and Malaysia were added to the exemptions list at 04:00 BST on 11 August.
It also includes:
Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Barbados, BES Islands, Croatia, Curaçao, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Estonia, Faroe Islands, Fiji, Finland, France, French Polynesia, Germany, Greece, Greenland, Grenada, Guadeloupe, Hong Kong, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Macau, Mauritius, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Réunion, San Marino, Seychelles, South Korea, St Barthélemy, St Kitts and Nevis, St Lucia, St Pierre and Miquelon, Slovakia, Slovenia, St Vincent and the Grenadine, Switzerland, Taiwan, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Vatican City, Vietnam
Those entering the UK from the common travel area - the Republic of Ireland, the Channel Islands, or the Isle of Man - are exempt, as are the 14 British Overseas Territories.
Tourists in GreeceIMAGE COPYRIGHTGETTY IMAGES
image captionTravellers re-entering the UK from Greece currently do not have to quarantine
Health measures like quarantine are set by each UK nation separately.
Wales and Northern Ireland have introduced quarantine exemptions for the same countries as England. Scotland is also allowing exemptions, and has updated its own list of countries with which it is now allowing travel without quarantine.
Your in-depth country by country guide
You finally got abroad, but was it worth it?
Which other countries are not on the list?
You must isolate for 14 days if you arrive in the UK from Canada, the US, much of Central and South America, and some countries in Africa, the Middle East and Asia.
Travellers from Sweden, Portugal, Russia and anywhere else not on the list also have to quarantine.
Further restrictions may also be placed on UK travellers if its infection rate rises.
Passengers arriving at HeathrowIMAGE COPYRIGHTGETTY IMAGES
What about restrictions at my destination?
Travellers leaving the UK could still face restrictions - including quarantine - when they arrive in one of the exempted countries.
About half the countries and territories on the list have restrictions for arriving UK visitors. These include:
UK visitors to France must quarantine for 14 days
New Zealand has barred almost all foreign travellers
Australia requires an exemption visa if you are not a resident or a citizen and everyone entering needs to quarantine for 14 days
South Korea requires all arrivals to be tested and to isolate for 14 days
Adult visitors to Iceland can either pay for a test or go into quarantine, with a second test required if you plan to stay 10 days or more
Anyone who has been in the UK in the previous 14 days is not currently allowed to enter Japan

+

Coronavirus: Can I get travel insurance and what are my travel rights?
By Kevin Peachey
Personal finance reporter
14 August 2020
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsCoronavirus pandemic
Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Coronavirus has meant abandoning or hastily rearranging holiday plans, for many people.

France and the Netherlands are among the countries now on the UK's quarantine list.

Monaco, Malta - and the Caribbean nations of Aruba and Turks and Caicos - have also been added.

The 14-day isolation requirement begins at 04:00 BST on Saturday 15 August.

People travelling to France from the UK will also be expected to quarantine for 14 days upon arrival there, the French Embassy has confirmed.

Returning holidaymakers from Spain and Belgium were already subject to the quarantine rules.

What does this all mean for your travel rights?

What if the government changes its advice?
The government has changed its travel quarantine rules for countries where rising coronavirus cases have caused it concern.

Anyone planning trips to countries added to the list will be asked to self-isolate for two weeks on their return.

If that affects your ability to work, it could mean having to cancel your trip.

In cases where only quarantine rules are changed, you are unlikely to be able to get your money back from tour operators or hotels.

However, if the Foreign Office also advises against travel to a country, which it has in many cases, then a refund for the whole package holiday or the opportunity to rearrange should be granted.


Media captionFlying is a very different experience in the age of coronavirus
I organised my own trip. How am I covered?
If you booked flights and accommodation separately and now think you cannot travel owing to quarantine, you may face a large bill for a holiday you will not take.

Flights, trains and ferries to France and the Netherlands are likely to continue to run. If your trip is not cancelled by the operator, you cannot claim a refund.

Consumer organisation Which? says this could leave people "significantly out of pocket".

Instead, you may want to rebook for another time, although that can carry a hefty fee with some airlines. Tickets for trains through the tunnel and ferry tickets may be more flexible, depending on which ticket you bought.

Accommodation rebooking or refunds depend on the terms, and generosity, of the owner.

Will travel insurance cover me if I get coronavirus?
Where the Foreign Office advice states UK residents should not travel, it is very unlikely that any travel insurance will be valid.

For example, Foreign Office advice against taking a cruise remains in place, as it does for travel to a number of high-risk countries.

In countries where travel is acceptable, according to the Foreign Office, cover will depend on your policy.

Most will cover treatment for illness and injury while overseas, but not all will do so for coronavirus-related illness.

Some policies are now being sold that will cover emergency treatment or repatriation to the UK for Covid-19 contracted while in a resort.

There will be relatively little protection for those who cannot travel because they develop symptoms just before they are due to go on holiday.

Travel companies are unlikely to give a refund, or allow people to rearrange.

What about insurance if I have to self-isolate?
The government says people must self-isolate for 14 days after coming into contact with someone with coronavirus.

This could lead to cancelled or delayed holidays.

Insurance broadly falls into three categories:

Anyone who had a travel insurance policy bought or renewed before early March may still be able to make a claim for such a cancellation
Renewals of annual policies may now be unavailable, or have coronavirus exclusions. In other words, the terms may have changed
People buying travel insurance now are unlikely to be covered for coronavirus-related delays or cancellations
Can I get a refund for cancelled flights or holidays?
Yes, but there have been delays for many people who have been seeking refunds for cancelled holidays.

The Association of British Travel Agents (Abta) told BBC News that people "absolutely have the right to a refund" for package holidays cancelled by a provider, but payments would take longer than the 14 statutory days.

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
If your flight is cancelled, you are also entitled to a full refund to your original form of payment, within seven days. Huge backlogs mean these have been delayed considerably, prompting complaints to airlines and the regulator, the Civil Aviation Authority.

Many customers have reported their airlines have been offering a voucher for another flight instead of a refund.

And trade body Airlines UK told BBC News in early April that vouchers were its preferred method of compensation in a "very grave" financial situation.

If you are offered a voucher, or a free rebooking instead of cash, you can accept or refuse it.

But if the airline later folds, the voucher will probably become invalid.

If you rebook and later decide against going on a flight that has not been cancelled, you will have lost your right to a refund and are unlikely to be covered by your travel insurance.

The Association of British Insurers said travel insurance was to cover losses incurred by unforeseen circumstances and coronavirus no longer met those criteria.

People should also pay attention to "disruption cover" in terms and conditions, which may, or may not, pay out for costs such as unused hotel bookings or car hire.

+

Coronavirus: Can I get facial treatment at a beauty salon?
Published3 days ago
Related Topics
Coronavirus pandemic
Beautician working on a woman's eyebrowsIMAGE COPYRIGHTGETTY IMAGES
More lockdown rules, which were meant to be eased in England a fortnight ago, will be lifted from Saturday 15 August.
It will mean bowling alleys and indoor skating rinks can reopen - and beauty salons can offer treatments on people's faces.
Can I now have my eyebrows done?
Yes, from Saturday 15 August in England you will be able to go to your local salon, spa or barber and have a treatment on your face. That includes eyelash and eyebrow tinting, and also eyebrow threading.
Many nail bars, tanning and beauty salons are already open.
Certain safety measures must be followed, including:
Using screens to protect staff and customers
Only accepting pre-booked appointments
Avoiding skin-to-skin contact
Customers must not eat or drink anything except water
In Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales, nail bars and beauty salons have also reopened.
Changes for weddings, casinos and live performances
Many other things that were due to be allowed in England a fortnight ago will now be permitted from 15 August - subject to Covid-secure guidelines.
The reopening of casinos
Indoor performances in front of a live audience
Wedding receptions - in the form of a sit-down meal - of up to 30 people
woman on treadmillIMAGE COPYRIGHTGETTY IMAGES
Are indoor gyms and swimming pools open?
Indoor pools and gyms reopened in England from 25 July, for the first time since the beginning of lockdown.
Sports halls and leisure centres are also now allowed to open.
Gyms have to follow strict social distancing guidelines, including:
Capacity limits, controlled by a timed booking system
Reduced class sizes
Equipment spaced out and improved ventilation
Temporary floor markings in dance studios where possible
Customers encouraged to shower and change at home
Outdoor gyms and pools have been open in England since 4 July, because there is less risk of catching coronavirus in the fresh air.
Swim England published guidance for operators on how to reopen indoor pools, including:
Increasing the supply of outside air to pools
Implementing a one-way entry and exit system
Minimising the use of changing rooms
Indoor gyms and swimming pools are now allowed to open in Wales and Northern Ireland.
The Scottish government has given an indicative date of 14 September for indoor gyms and swimming pools, but says it is working to try to open them sooner.
Which sports will I be able to watch and play?
Pilot schemes to test the safe return of spectators at sporting events in England will take place from Saturday 15 August.
The hope is to reopen competition venues for sports fans, with social distancing measures, from 1 October.
The first pilot will be at the final of the World Snooker Championship at Sheffield's Crucible Theatre on 15-16 August.
Bowling alleys and indoor skating rinks can now also reopen in England.
Bowling alleys in Wales and Northern Ireland have already reopened, while Scotland has set an indicative date of 24 August.
Can I now get a tattoo?
Tattoo artist in Northern IrelandIMAGE COPYRIGHTPA MEDIA
Many tattoo artists in England are already working again - following similar safety guidelines to nail bars and beauty salons.
But from Saturday 15 August they will be able to give you a tattoo on your face - which until now has not been allowed.
Tattoo artists work in very close contact with their customers, often for a long time. Touching people is known to increase the risk of transmitting the virus.
The Tattoo and Piercing Industry Union submitted a 10-point plan for reopening studios to the government, which included:
wearing masks, face shields, aprons and gloves
keeping work stations 2m (6ft) apart
considering relocating or deferring tattoos or piercings that require face-to-face working
Tattoo studios are also allowed to open in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales.
What else is now allowed in England?
From 15 August, soft play centres can reopen.
Outdoor arts performances have already resumed. Events must:
Have a socially-distanced audience
Reduce capacity
Only accept pre-booked tickets
Display clear social distance markings and be deep cleaned between performances
Recreational cricket has also now resumed. Grassroots football teams are allowed to resume competitive training and will be allowed to play competitive matches, with leagues allowed to resume in September. However:
Time spent congregating at a venue should be limited
Sports where a ball is touched by multiple players should have a plan for cleaning it when it goes out of play
Spectators will be allowed in small numbers following social distancing guidelines
Conferences and other business events can resume from October, subject to pilot events.
What else is still not allowed?
Nightclubs, dance halls, and discotheques, as well as sexual entertainment venues and hostess bars, remain closed in law across England.

+

'Don't take knockbacks as insults, l learn from them'

'Don't take knockbacks as insults, l learn from them'
Close
Shane Ryan founded the ready meals company Fiid. At the start, supermarket buyers repeatedly refused to stock his product in their stores. He says he initially took these knockbacks personally.

But he then started listening more carefully to the reasons behind their rejections. This led him to change his products to make it easier for them to sell. His CEO Secret: listen to the buyers when they're turning you down.

+

Coronavirus: How could a recession affect me?
By Ben King
Business reporter, BBC News
12 August 2020
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsCoronavirus pandemic
Media captionWhat is a recession?
The UK is in recession for the first time in 11 years.

So what exactly does that mean?

What is a recession?
In normal times, a country's economy grows.

Its citizens, on average, become slightly richer as the value of the goods and services it produces - its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) - increases.

But sometimes the value of goods and services produced falls.

A recession is usually defined as when this happens for two three-month periods - or quarters - in a row.

This has now happened in the UK for the first time since 2009.

If a recession carries on for a long time, or is particularly bad, it is known as a depression.

Why does it matter if there is a recession?
For most people, economic growth is a good thing.

It usually means there are more jobs, and companies are more profitable and can pay employees and shareholders more.

A growing economy also means the government receives more money in taxes. So it can cut taxes, or spend more on benefits, public services and government workers' wages.

When the economy shrinks, all these things go into reverse.

What pushed the UK into recession?
Official figures on 12 August confirmed that the UK had entered a recession for the first time in 11 years.

UK GDP fell by 2.2% in the first quarter of 2020 (January to March), as the economy began to feel the effects of lockdown.

Figures for the second quarter (April to June) showed the steepest fall on record, of 20.4%, as the lockdown brought many areas of the economy to a complete standstill.

Those two quarters in a row of falling GDP confirm that the UK is in a recession.

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) predicts huge falls in GDP for 2020 as a whole - an extraordinary fall of 8.0% for the US and 10.2% for the UK.

It estimates the entire world economy will shrink by 4.9% this year, making it the worst recession since the 1930s' Great Depression.

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Unemployed men queuing for work during the Great Depression of the 1930s
How could a recession affect me?
Some people may lose their jobs, or find it harder to get promotions, or a pay rise.

Graduates and school leavers could find it harder to get a first job.

The Bank of England said the UK economic slump will be less severe than expected, but recovery will take longer.

It expects the economy to shrink 9.5% this year, compared with an earlier estimate of 14%.

However, the pain of a recession is typically not felt equally across society, and inequality can increase.

For instance, many UK homeowners who kept their jobs during the last recession did OK. Mortgage interest payments for many fell considerably, leaving them with more spending money.

Others, such as benefit recipients or public sector workers, did less well.

A SIMPLE GUIDE: How do I protect myself?
AVOIDING CONTACT: The rules on self-isolation and exercise
PUBLIC TRANSPORT: Is it safe to travel?
WILL I GET PAID IF I CAN'T WORK? Sick pay, wages and time off rules
TESTING: Can I get tested for coronavirus?
How long was the last recession?
In the UK the last recession, caused by the global financial crisis, lasted five quarters - from the second quarter of 2008 onwards.

GDP fell by an estimated 7.2% over the whole period.

Unemployment rose sharply, but began to fall back again two years later.

And there was a massive deficit - the gap between what the government raises in taxes and what it spends on public services.

This resulted in a near-doubling of the national debt, and a decade-long programme of austerity. There were steep cuts in many areas of government spending, except health, education and international aid.

When will the recession end?
The Bank of England predicts the UK economy will grow in the third quarter of 2020, so according to the official definition the recession may already be over.

However, some of the worst effects of the recession, particularly unemployment, are only beginning to appear.

The IMF predicts that the world economy will grow next year, too. However no-one knows how strong the recovery will be.

If all the businesses which shut during the pandemic reopen quickly, the consequences would be less severe.

However, there are fears over future spread of the virus, and people may not want to travel or go out, so the consequences will be felt for many years.

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Industries such as air travel could take a long time to recover from the pandemic
What can be done?
The discovery of a vaccine would help create a strong recovery, but until then, there are a few remedies available.

In the last recession, central banks cut interest rates, so people and businesses could borrow more easily, and had more to spend.

But interest rates are already close to zero in many places, and a further cut may not be possible.

Governments around the world are already borrowing huge sums to support their economies, but that borrowing comes at a cost.

+

Coronavirus: How can I find a new job?
By Eleanor Lawrie
BBC News

Published4 days ago
Related Topics
Coronavirus pandemic
Woman looking at laptop screenIMAGE COPYRIGHTGETTY IMAGES
It's a tough time in the jobs market, as firms shed staff or freeze recruitment to cut costs.
The UK has fallen into recession and suffered the largest drop in employment in more than a decade,.
But things are gradually improving, with early August seeing the biggest weekly increase in online job vacancies this year.
How do I start looking for a new job?
Knowing where to start may be quite daunting, especially if you have been out of the jobs market for a while.
To maximise your chances, one strategy is to create an appealing online profile so that recruiters and companies will approach you, while you also actively apply for jobs.
To do this, consider your core skills, rather than hunting for a specific job title, suggests Corinne Mills, managing director of Personal Career Management.
For example, if you work in retail customer service, this could translate to other people-facing roles such as sales, or a similar role in another sector.
She suggests searching for these core skills online, to see which jobs come up, while also listing them on your own professional profiles.
Recruiters often search for people based on a list of desired skills rather than specific qualities, so this will make you more visible.
How can I find out which jobs are available?
While this will vary from sector to sector, many companies list jobs on their own website or on recruitment sites.
You can also sign up with a general or specialist recruitment agency.
If you want to work for a particular company, check if they hire directly or through a recruiter.
Chart showing job vacancy data to 7 August
image captionVacancies in early August were being posted at just over half the rate of 2019, the ONS jobs analysis website Adzuna suggests
And if you want a specific job, be proactive and contact someone doing that role to discover how they got there.
Professional networks can also be useful. These could be LinkedIn or Facebook groups, or industry and community organisations, where jobs and events are posted and advice is available.
Some industries and employers have even set up virtual networking events and job fairs during the pandemic. Also check vacancies in trade publications and websites.
What jobs are available post-lockdown?
'I apply everywhere - few firms reply'
How can I stand out from other applicants?
With thousands of people applying for some roles, your personal network should be your first port of call, Corinne suggests.
Friends, family and other acquaintances will know hundreds of people between them, and some should know of businesses which are hiring.
While an introduction won't automatically get you the job, many employers like a personal recommendation and you may hear about roles before they are advertised.
Recruitment CEO Amy GoldingIMAGE COPYRIGHTAMY GOLDING
image captionCall companies to follow up on your application, recruitment CEO Amy Golding suggests
When compiling your CV, emphasise your skills which a prospective employer wants, rather than listing things you have already done.
List past achievements clearly; for example, that you finished a recent project on time and within budget, or you brought your business new clients.
Asking someone else to read your application before sending it helps spot any spelling or grammatical errors that could mean your CV goes straight in the bin.
Show enthusiasm and give reasons why you want to work for this employer specifically.
Tailor your CV and cover letter for each application, which is time-consuming but more likely to result in a job, suggests Amy Golding, head of technology recruitment firm Opus Talent Solutions.
She adds: ''If you don't hear back within three days, call them - because that makes it harder for them to ignore you!''
What help is out there?
The national careers service offers many tools. These include skills assessment, a search tool for courses, and help with CVs, job searching and your rights and benefits if you are on furlough or out of work. The government's ''find a job'' website also lists vacancies.
In the meantime, many universities and other institutions are currently offering free training courses.
For example, the University of York offers free short courses in fields such as cognitive psychology, the University of Oxford has a free course on economic development, and the Open University offers many free courses too.
Many other platforms offer free online coding tutorials.
Gaining new skills could help you move into a new sector and shows employers you've been productive during lockdown.
People cycling past a ''to let'' signIMAGE COPYRIGHTGETTY IMAGES
image captionThe retail sector has been hit particularly badly by the pandemic
Which sectors are hiring?
In August, the volume of online job adverts posted was at 62% of the 2019 average, up from 53% the week before, with several professions seeing continued or increased demand.
For example, health and social care vacancies are almost back to 2019 levels, data suggests, while the government is planning to fund thousands of nurse apprenticeships in England.
Job-seekers should be ''strategic'' and target sectors experiencing job shortages as well as those that are growing, says Gerwyn Davies, analyst at human resources body the CIPD.
The shortage occupation list - used to offer work visas to people moving to the UK - quickly shows where workers are needed, and includes fields like engineering, web programming and graphic design.
Now could be a good time to join the public sector, he suggests, with initiatives like the national retraining scheme helping people move into areas like social work, teaching and healthcare.
Tech recruiter Amy suggests applying to companies which are fully digital, regardless of the role you want, as the pandemic has accelerated the shift to online working.
These could be online retail companies like Amazon, which is currently recruiting for 15,000 UK jobs - or tech companies working in education or healthcare.

+

Unemployment and coronavirus: Older workers feel 'forgotten'

Unemployment and coronavirus: Older workers feel 'forgotten'
Close
Julie Morris explains what it is like to be job hunting in your late fifties, during the coronavirus outbreak.

In general unemployed people over the age of 50 are twice as likely to be out of work for 12 months or longer, compared to those younger than 50.

During the pandemic, women aged over 50 have been hit hardest, with nearly 100,000 leaving the workforce entirely, according to the Rest Less recruitment company.

Have you lost your job because of the pandemic? Email haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk.

+

What is redundancy, who can be made redundant and what are my rights?
By Kevin Peachey
Personal finance reporter
11 August 2020
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsCoronavirus pandemic
Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Job losses are climbing as businesses feel the financial effects of the coronavirus crisis.

What are your rights if you are made redundant?

What is redundancy?
When a business needs to reduce its workforce, it closes jobs and the people doing those jobs are made redundant.

It is not the same as getting the sack.

If you are made redundant, you have rights written into law.

Who can be selected for redundancy?
You must have been chosen fairly.

Among the reasons that are not considered a fair basis for selection:

Your age or gender
You are pregnant
You have been a whistleblower
You are a member of a trade union
You have asked for holiday or maternity leave
Employers may make selections based on length of service (last in, first out) or disciplinary records.

Many firms ask for volunteers, and offer a redundancy payment.

However, it is up to the employer whether they actually select those volunteers for redundancy.

I'm furloughed. Can I be made redundant?
You can be made redundant while on furlough, but the same rules of fairness apply.

Some people will have redundancy rights in their contract which may be more generous than the legal minimum.

Can my employer make me redundant on the spot?
No.

The amount of notice you are given will depend on how long you have been employed:

At least one week's notice if you have been employed between one month and two years
One week's notice for each year if employed between two and 12 years
12 weeks' notice if employed for 12 years or more
You are entitled to a consultation with your employer if you are being made redundant.

What are my rights if I am made redundant?
What jobs are available post-lockdown?
How the financial shockwave is affecting jobs and money
If an employer is cutting 20 or more jobs at any one time, it must organise a collective consultation involving a union or employee representative. This must start at least 30 days before anyone's job ends.

If 100 or more people are being made redundant, group meetings must start at least 45 days before anyone's job ends.

Even if a company is insolvent and is shutting down, there is still a consultation process.

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
What redundancy pay am I entitled to?
If you have worked continuously for your employer for two years or more, you have the legal right to redundancy pay. There is a statutory minimum but some employment contracts and employers are more generous.

The amount is calculated from your age, length of continuous service, and current salary. You will get at least:

Half a week's pay for each full year worked when you're under 22
A week's pay for each full year worked when you're between 22 and 41
One and a half week's pay for each full year worked when you're 41 or older
An employer is not obliged to pay you more than £16,140, or £16,800 if you're in Northern Ireland.

If you want to check your entitlement, the government has a redundancy calculator as does the Money and Pensions Service.

If you still have holiday owed when you leave, you are entitled to be paid for that too.

If a business has gone bust, then redundancy pay may be provided by the government.

Guides to redundancy
Conciliation service Acas (England, Wales and Scotland)
Labour Relations Agency (Northern Ireland)
Work and redundancy - Money and Pensions Service
Leaving a job - Citizens Advice
Redundancies, dismissals and disciplinaries - Gov.uk
Guide to redundancy - TUC
What happens to the tax I've paid?
The first £30,000 of any redundancy pay is tax-free.

This amount includes any non-cash benefits that form part of your redundancy package, such as a company car or computer. These will be given a cash value and added to your redundancy pay entitlement.

Any amount over that will be taxed.

At the end of the financial year (which runs from April to March) when you have been made redundant, it is worth checking whether you have paid too much or too little tax. This may depend on whether you have found another job.

What can I do to find another job?
If you are facing redundancy, you may be allowed paid time off to look for another job.

If you have worked continuously for your employer for at least two years, you are allowed to take 40% of your working week off - two days out of a five-day week, for example - to attend interviews.

Your employer will have to pay you for this time. If you take any more time off than this, they do not have to pay you for it, although some employers may be more generous.

Anyone re-training after being made redundant may also be entitled to grants, bursaries, loans, and free courses.

+

Coronavirus: How to stay cool in a face mask as hot UK weather forecast
By Francesca Gillett
BBC News
7 August 2020
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsUK heatwaves
Image copyrightEPA
It is going to be sweltering.

You don't really need the TV weather maps turning red to realise that much of the UK is going to be roasting in temperatures above 30C. But as you slip on your favourite summer top and shorts, you may break out in a hot sweat... as you realise you are also likely to be enduring part of your day in a face mask.

Keeping cool while wearing a facial covering might be more difficult, but we've gathered some tips.

Choose the right mask
"We have all got to wear masks here, but there's a few things you can do," says consultant dermatologist Dr Adil Sheraz, who works at a London NHS hospital.

The top tip for him is to choose a mask made from a breathable material, such as cotton or even bamboo.

He says although surgical masks - the thin, blue masks that many people are seen wearing - provide protection from spreading the virus, they aren't that breathable and "they are not the best to use for keeping cool".

But he adds that one downside to cotton masks is that they absorb more fluid and can get damp - so he suggests taking a spare out on hot days.

The colour of the mask might also help. "Consider having a mask that's a lighter colour, rather than a darker one," says Dr Sheraz. Dark colours absorb more light, converting it into heat.

Image copyrightEPA
What about putting your mask in the freezer before you head out in the heat? Dr Sheraz is unconvinced. "It's not a bad idea. The only thing I was thinking about is you don't want people get cold burns on their faces. So I don't think I'd advise that."

Dr Anil Budh-Raja, a GP who also offers skin and cosmetic treatments at clinics in Birmingham and Chiswick, suggested a towel which has been put in the freezer could be used as a mask.

The government says a face covering can be anything which safely the covers the nose and mouth - but of course you must be able to tie it in place. Remember that public towel slips are always embarrassing in the summer heat.

How to look after yourself in hot weather
10 tips for sleeping in hot weather
Change what you put on your skin
"The other thing you want to do is try and avoid make-up," says Dr Sheraz, as it can mix with sweat and clog pores. "Use sun block and a water based moisturiser."

Dr Budh-Raja also echoes the need to apply sun cream, as the Met Office forecasts high UV levels in some areas.

"You can still get UVA and UVB rays through a mask," he says "Put [sun cream] on and wear a mask on top," he said. "It won't clog up if you use the right one."

Image copyrightREUTERS
Dr Budh-Raja suggested putting some hyaluronic acid serum on the face "which helps keep moisture in the skin". "Refrigerate it and you can put in on, that will keep you cool for a while," he said.

Is a visor advisory?
Of course many people have invested in a full facial shield, instead of or as well as wearing a mask.

But if you've joined the agents of shield, remember that they are generally held in place by a headband worn bang against your forehead, which is just about the slippiest and sweatiest part of your face on a hot day.

So remove the whole contraption and mop your brow occasionally.

Above all, stay hydrated
It's all well and good having the handy bottle of water to hand but if you're steadfastly not taking any liquid on board because you are keeping your mouth covered, you may end up in danger from dehydration.

There is no problem removing your mask to have a refreshing glug of cool water - just remember to gel your hands before touching your mask and aim to remove it when you are at a safe distance from others.

Other small changes can also keep you cooler overall, Dr Sheraz suggests.

He says people should plan activities for the times of the day when it is cooler, as well as wearing a hat.

He adds that masks are already more common in some Asian countries that experience hot weather, so maybe we should borrow a tip from some of the people who live there and carry a battery-powered fan.

Image copyrightREUTERS
Johns Hopkins University also advises anyone who feels lightheaded, dizzy or is finding it harder to breathe to get out of the heat.

And it warns: "How someone will respond to heat stress while wearing a mask depends on a combination of the intensity of the heat, duration of exposure and any underlying medical condition.

"Regardless of the type of mask, don't try to make your face feel cooler by dousing the mask in water. Getting face coverings wet can compromise their filtration capabilities."

+

How not to wear a face mask

How not to wear a face mask
Close
Does it matter if you wear your face mask wrong? Well, yes.

Wearing a face mask or covering incorrectly can make it easier for coronavirus to spread.

New rules mean face coverings are now mandatory in England in all shops, as well as enclosed public spaces, transport hubs, banks and post offices.

Those who break the rules could face a fine of up to £100.

There are exemptions for children under 11, those with disabilities or certain health conditions such as respiratory or cognitive impairments that make it difficult for them to wear a face covering.

People in Scotland already had to wear coverings in shops; Wales and Northern Ireland are discussing the move.

BBC health correspondent Laura Foster explains the correct way to wear your homemade mask or face covering.

Video by Megan Fisher, Terry Saunders and Laura Foster.

+

Coronavirus: What are the rules for face masks or face coverings?
By Michelle Roberts
Health editor, BBC News online
10 August 2020
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsCoronavirus pandemic
Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Face coverings are now required when visiting museums, galleries, cinemas and places of worship in England.

It has also been compulsory to wear them in shops since 24 July.

What are the face coverings rules in shops?
Face coverings must be worn in enclosed public spaces in England - this includes shops, supermarkets, shopping centres, banks, building societies and post offices. It extends to railway and bus stations and airports.

Customers must wear a face covering before entering any shop and keep it on until they leave.

Those who fail to do so could be fined up to £100, or £50 if they pay within 14 days. The rules will be enforced by the police, not shop workers, and only ''as a last resort''.

Shop workers do not have to wear coverings.

Will shops expect customers to wear masks?
Retailers differ over their approach. For example, Sainsbury's says it "won't be challenging customers without a mask'' since they may have a reason not to wear one, whereas Tesco says it has signs explaining the rules and also sells masks.

In Scotland, it's been a requirement to wear face coverings in shops since 10 July. Anyone not wearing one can be fined £60 (reduced to £30 if paid within 28 days) for a first offence. People with certain medical conditions or disabilities are exempt, along with children under five.

In Northern Ireland, face coverings became compulsory in shops and other enclosed public spaces from 10 August. Breaches can attract a fixed penalty notice of £60 (reduced to £30 if paid within 14 days).

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
How about restaurants and takeaways?
In England, face coverings do not have to be worn where it would be ''impractical'' to do so.

That includes restaurants, pubs and gyms.

They must be worn in a shop or cafe when buying food and drink to take away, but can be removed if you sit down to eat and drink.

They are also optional in:

Hairdressers and beauty salons
Dentists and opticians
In Wales you do not currently have to wear a face covering in shops, or takeaways.

In Scotland, they are compulsory in shops and libraries. But the rules do not apply in takeaways, cafes, coffee shops, restaurants, pubs or in banks and building societies.

Who doesn't have to wear a face covering?
Some people do not have to wear a face covering. They include:

Children under 11
Those unable to put on or wear a face covering because of a physical or mental illness or disability
People for whom wearing or removing a face covering will cause severe distress
Anyone assisting someone who relies on lip reading to communicate
You can take off your mask if:

You need to eat, drink, or take medication
A police officer or other official asks you to or if shop staff need to verify your age
You are entering a shop to avoid harm, if you do not have a mask on you
Children under three should not wear face masks as they could cause choking and suffocation, Public Health England says.

What are the face covering rules on public transport?
Since 15 June, anyone travelling by bus, train, ferry or plane in England must wear a face covering, if they are not exempted.

If it is "reasonably necessary" for you to eat or drink, you can remove the face covering to do so.

People can be refused travel if they don't follow the rules, and can be fined as a last resort.

Public transport excludes cruise ships, school transport, taxis and private hire vehicles.

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
In Scotland, it is compulsory to wear face coverings on all public transport.

This is also the case in Wales. These coverings should be three layers thick.

The wearing of face coverings on most buses, trains and ferries became mandatory in Northern Ireland on 10 July.

Where am I supposed to get a face covering?
The government has been careful to use the term "face covering" rather than "face mask" - with surgical masks kept for medical use.

The BBC has created a guide on how to make your own face covering. The government has issued its own advice too.

Do face coverings work?
World Health Organization (WHO) advice says non-medical face coverings should be worn in public where social distancing is not possible.

Coronavirus is spread when droplets are sprayed into the air when infected people talk, cough or sneeze. Those droplets can then fall on surfaces.

The WHO says there is also emerging evidence of airborne transmission of the virus, with tiny particles hanging in aerosol form in the air.

Homemade cloth face-coverings can help reduce the spread from people who are contagious but have no symptoms or are yet to develop symptoms.

Scientists in Singapore suggest the contagion risk is especially high in the 24-48 hours before an infected person is even aware they might have the disease.

Taking a face covering on and off can also risk contamination, the WHO says.

+

'Maskne' and bold makeup: How masks are changing how we look
By Yvette Tan
BBC News
25 July 2020
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsCoronavirus pandemic
Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
The 2020 look: Face masks are now mandatory in many situations
For many of us, face masks have become an essential part of everyday life thanks to the coronavirus. But regularly wearing one can have an unfortunate side-effect: mask-induced acne, aka "maskne".

"Maskne is absolutely real. No questions asked," Dr Mona Gohara, Associate Clinical Professor of Dermatology at the Yale School of Medicine, told the BBC.

"I wear two masks and sometimes a protective shield… [and] have myself experienced it and continue to experience it."

It's a frustrating scenario that anyone who's had unwanted spots can probably sympathise with.

But what exactly causes maskne?
According to dermatologist Angeline Yong, the "constant rubbing of the masks against our skin causes micro-tears, allowing easier entry for bacteria and dirt to clog up our pores".

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
The friction from face masks creates "micro-tears" in our skin which can let bacteria in
And then there's that moist, damp environment going on underneath your mask.

"Breathing into a mask also creates a hot and moist environment that leads to the build-up of sweat, oil and bacteria. Add on the fact that face masks are occlusive [designed to block things] by nature, and it's a recipe for skin disaster," says Dr Yong, whose practice is based in Singapore.

Dr Yong says she tells her clients one way to combat maskne is to "avoid thick, occlusive skincare creams".

"I always tell my patients to opt for more lightweight water-based products underneath the mask... a lightweight moisturiser can also act as an additional protective barrier and prevent chafing," she says.

"Ideally, you should [also] be using a mild and gentle exfoliator to ... support the absorption of your moisturiser."

Why have attitudes to face masks changed?
Why men are less likely to wear face masks
'I'm sure I'll hate myself when my Botox runs out'
Perhaps unsurprisingly, skincare companies have been quick to recognise the rise of maskne.

Popular Korean skincare brand Dr Jart now has a special "Maskne Essentials" category on its site - with items like a "facial barrier mask" and an anti-blemish patch.

Image copyrightDR JART
Image caption
Even skincare cult favourite Dr Jart has jumped on the maskne bandwagon
According to beauty giant L'Oréal, the past few months have seen a "strong rise in deep-cleansing products".

Jochen Zaumseil, L'Oréal's executive-vice president in Asia-Pacific, said popular skincare brands like La Roche-Posay and CeraVe had seen a "huge boom" recently - with a rise in demand for products like cleansers and sheet masks.

In Asia-Pacific, this rise in deep-cleansing products was attributed to mask-related issues, including issues like oilier skin and acne, as well as an increase in hygiene habits due to Covid-19.

"Skincare has always been by far our number one [revenue driver], [but] of course that's shifted even further [ahead] during the crisis," said Mr Zaumseil.

Why some countries wear face masks and others don't
But while skincare is booming, the makeup industry has taken a hit as more people work from home and avoid heading out.

Mr Zaumseil says demand for makeup is expected to rise again as life returns to normal, businesses begin to re-open, and more people start going into work.

According to L'Oréal, this is what it's witnessed in China, which is several months ahead of most of the world in coping with the virus.

It found that some 34% of Chinese women wore makeup in February, during the peak of the lockdown - this figure has now increased to 68% in late June to early July.

However, L'Oréal says there's been a consistent demand for products that show up above people's face masks.

Image copyrightMELINA BASNIGHT
Image caption
YouTuber Melina Basnight recommends a strong eye makeup look for mask wearers
"The eyes are the most visible part of your face now, [so] mascara, eyeliner, these are doing very well," said Mr Zaumseil.

Lightweight products are proving popular, as are long-lasting, non-smudge lipsticks that will not transfer onto masks.

'Contouring is out, eyes are in!'
On YouTube, the trend has echoed across the beauty industry, and a growing number of vloggers are making mask-friendly makeup tutorial videos.

Heavy contoured looks are out, and bold eyes are in.

"You're focusing more on eyebrows, eyeshadows - because you do have something that covers half your face. I like really bushy eyebrows and a really bold, colourful eye palette, just glamming up the eyes to help you stand out," US YouTuber Melina Basnight told the BBC.

"I also put on some light makeup on the rest of my face because there are times you take off your mask when you go outside. I've kinda perfected what works."

Melina's top three makeup tips:
Image copyrightCOLLAGE/MELINA BASNIGHT
A bold eye look to make you stand out from the crowd, playing with lots of colours
Bushy eyebrows, which she refers to as her "werewolf brows"
Making sure your "skincare game is on point" - she typically still puts makeup on the lower half of her face but keeps it light
Ms Basnight, who is a discharge assistant at a Texas hospital, is required to wear a mask every day at work.

"[Earlier this year] I had a few people asking me how [to put on makeup with a mask] and at that point I had already been wearing masks for a few weeks," she said.

"A lot of people still want to wear makeup even with their masks. It just provides a sense of normalcy. At a time where nothing is normal, it's just that tiny thing you can hold on to."

So she decided to create a mask-friendly makeup tutorial on her MakeupMenaree channel.

Filipino YouTuber Nina Carpio said she was inspired to focus on the issue back in May - after experiencing first-hand the damage a full face of makeup dealt to her skin.

The combination of makeup and perspiration under a mask, she says, irritated her skin and caused her pores to clog. The makeup also transferred to the underside of her mask, dirtying it.

Image copyrightSMILE LIKE NINA/YOUTUBE
Image caption
YouTuber Nina Carpio has stripped her makeup back after finding foundation and masks don't mix
"I tried putting on a full [face] of makeup with foundation, powder, contour… I found it will not work. [So for now] I skip everything. I put on the face and lips, and just put products like moisturisers and lip balm," said the YouTuber, whose channel is Smile Like Nina.

And this trend, she says, is expected to continue for the foreseeable future.

"As long as we are still living in the pandemic, face masks will become part of our everyday - and so [our] makeup looks will definitely revolve around it."

+

Coronavirus: A user's guide to wearing a face mask to the shops
15 July 2020
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsCoronavirus pandemic
There is now almost no excuse for not wearing a face mask while out shopping in England - covering your face is as essential as remembering your cash or bank card.

The rules differ a little around the UK. But wherever you live, it's going to be hard to avoid covering up your mouth and nose. And that raises a host of dilemmas.

How do I put it on correctly?
This is important to get right. The key things are to clean your hands before you put it on and take it off, and to make sure it fits snugly so there aren't any gaps between the material and your face.


Media captionCoronavirus: How to wear a face covering
Of course if your mask doesn't fit properly you can always adjust it, or tie it in a slightly more convenient way. But it needs to cover both your mouth and nose and also go up to the top of your nose, hooking behind your ears or the back of your head.

And remember, the idea is no gaps. Got it? You're good to go.

Deciding on the right one
When buying your mask the first thing you need to decide is what sort you want. The government says surgical masks and respirators should be reserved for those who need them to protect against risks in their workplace, such as NHS staff and care workers.

But you can still buy non-medical disposable face coverings, reusable cloth coverings, or even items like scarves and bandanas.

If single-use coverings are what you're after, you could head to a pharmacy - high street chains like Boots, Superdrug and Lloyds all sell them. And they're available on online sites like Amazon.

But more and more clothes retailers are also joining the marketplace with reusable fabric masks. In fact, it seems everywhere now sells reusable masks - from your local corner shop, to your favourite football club, to independent retailers on Etsy.

From ditsy designs to animal prints, there are a range of "fashion masks" on sites like Asos or Boohoo, or in shops like Oliver Bonas.

Can I take it off to talk?
No, sorry, that's not allowed. Coronavirus is spread when droplets are sprayed into the air when infected people cough or sneeze - but also when they talk. Those droplets can then fall on surfaces.

So it would defeat the point if you take it off to have a natter, really.

How to stop it fogging up my glasses

Media captionStop your glasses steaming up with a mask on
It's a worry that has been burdening many spectacle-wearers. It's a legitimate one, too - lenses can steam up when you wear a mask because your warm breath comes out of the top of the mask, hitting the cooler lenses and clouding them up.

The extra moisture can also mean that nose pads become slippery and your frames glasses slide down your face.

The key is to try, if possible, to make sure there aren't any gaps for the air to escape around your nose and cheeks. You could try tucking the mask behind your glasses, or tucking some tissue inside the top of the covering.

The opticians Specsavers recommends resting your glasses on top of your mask to help seal any gap, or using a piece of surgical tape to secure the mask to the bridge of your nose.

Failing that you could try washing your glasses in soapy water to stop them misting up.

What about my medical conditions?
A face covering should cover your mouth and nose while allowing you to breathe comfortably. But if you have a medical issue and suffer from breathing difficulties, it might not be quite that simple.

You may well already be among those exempt from wearing face coverings on public transport in England. The government hasn't given the precise wording of the rules for shops yet, so you'll need to check those once they're out.

But one tip from Asthma UK is to try a few different types to see if there is one that suits you. It suggests trying one out at home, or on a short walk around the block before heading off to do your weekly shop.

So how about recycling them?
No, sorry (again). If your mask isn't washable, or if it's disposable, the government says it should go in your "black bag" or general waste bin (or a litter bin if you're outside) once you've worn it.

Disposable face coverings should be thrown away after each use, or as soon as they are damp, according to the World Health Organization. This includes the lighter, pleated ones as well as the sturdier, particle-filtering masks.


Media captionCoronavirus: 'The masks you throw away could end up killing a whale'
The added waste has caused concern for environmentalists who say they're ending up in the sea.

The government says if you're worried about this you can "wash and reuse cloth face coverings", or make your own.

Making my own mask
Whether you're handy with a sewing machine, you like cutting up old t-shirts, or just want a quick fix, the principles are the same: the more layers of material the better, and the mask needs to fit snugly around the face, and allow you to breathe comfortably.

One study suggests the best materials to use are tightly-woven cottons or twill, natural silk or quilted cotton material. But you can also make do with what you have around your home.

We've put together a guide to different types and step-by-step instructions on how to make them.

Making sure you wash it
You should wash your fabric coverings after every use. That might sound like a lot, but the good news is you can put them in the washing machine with the rest of your clothes.

Bandanas, face scarves and coverings made of fabric, like cotton, can be washed in your regular laundry using hot water, says US-based Johns Hopkins Medicine.

You should wash it on the warmest appropriate water setting, but that depends on the type of material it's made from. Or you can hand wash them in hot, soapy water - scrubbing them for at least 20 seconds.

After washing, tumble dry them on a high setting and store in a clean place. If you are air drying, keep them flat and try to dry them in direct sunlight. Johns Hopkins Medicine also suggests using a non-scented detergent if you are sensitive to perfumes.

Finding the right size for my child
Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Some big high street names (Gap, Boots, Claire's to name just three) sell masks for children, alongside smaller manufacturers that have shifted their focus - including Thumbsie, which usually makes fabric gloves to help children stop sucking their thumbs.

Vistaprint offers a range of face coverings with adjustable straps in kid-friendly fabrics, while luxury brand Rachel Riley makes them with a cotton satin lining for children as young as three.

In England, only children aged 11 and over will have to wear one in shops. In Scotland, all children aged five and over must cover their faces in shops.

Treating my mask like my socks
Some people have said you should think of your masks like your socks - having a new one every day.

That doesn't mean you need to rush out and buy dozens of them, but it's a good idea to perhaps have more than one. That way you can wear a clean one while the other is in the wash.

And as for the disposable ones, they are usually sold in large numbers - Boots, for example, has a multipack of 80. That should be more than enough to do the weekly supermarket shop for a few weeks.

+

Coronavirus: US v other countries... did it mess up its reopening?
While European countries have managed to keep new infections at bay, by the time most Americans had emerged from lockdown restrictions, a second surge in cases was already under way.

Were the requirements met to safely reopen and how much testing was actually being done?

+

Does getting coronavirus make you immune?
Can you become reinfected with coronavirus if you've already had it? BBC Health reporter Rachel Schraer takes a look at what we know so far about immunity and Covid-19.

+

MOT rules in lockdown: How to get your car out of lockdown
Unless you are a key worker, you probably haven't used your car much over the past four months.

Due to coronavirus, in March the government allowed drivers who were scheduled for a MOT test to delay it for up to six months.

But now, mandatory MOTs for vehicles in England, Scotland and Wales are being reintroduced from 1 August.

+

Coronavirus: 'The masks you throw away could end up killing a whale'

Coronavirus: 'The masks you throw away could end up killing a whale'
Close
As the world battles the coronavirus pandemic, more and more protective equipment is ending up in the sea.

Globally we are using 129 billion face masks and 65 billion plastic gloves every month, according to some estimates.

And divers and observers are spotting more of this discarded waste floating underwater, causing problems for wildlife and washing up on shorelines all over the world.

+

Coronavirus: How to fly during a global pandemic

Coronavirus: How to fly during a global pandemic
Close
Jumping on a plane and going on holiday looks and feels very different to how it did at the start of 2020.

Airports and airlines have both been making changes to the way they work to get passengers flying again.

These include measures that help reduce the chances of coronavirus being spread, help ensure social distancing and reduce the number of things passengers need to touch known as 'contact points'.

The UK government has released advice on what you can do to keep safe while flying. It's currently reviewing its measures on asking people to quarantine when they return to the UK.

Here BBC Health and Science Correspondent, Laura Foster, has been to Southend Airport to show you what you need to do if you're thinking of catching a flight.

+

Coronavirus tests: Swabs don't damage the brain and other claims fact-checked
By Jack Goodman and Flora Carmichael
BBC Reality Check
18 July 2020
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsReality Check
Image copyrightAL SEIB
Claims that coronavirus tests can harm people are circulating on social media.

We investigated the claims in some of the most widely shared posts.

The nose swab can't damage the brain
A picture showing a swab test being taken has been circulated widely on Facebook and Instagram along with claims that the swab is taken at the "blood-brain barrier".

The idea you could access the blood-brain barrier through a swab up the nose is a complete misunderstanding of what it is and how it works.

The brain has lots of layers of protection. First and mostly obviously is the skull and within that, the brain is further encased in a protective membrane and fluid.

Within the blood vessels that line the brain, the blood-brain barrier is a tightly packed layer of cells that stops molecules circulating in the blood from passing into the brain, while allowing in things like oxygen and nutrients.

A swab stick inserted into the nose would need to break through multiple layers of tissue and drill through a bone and into the blood vessels to reach the blood-brain barrier.

"The swab cannot reach the blood brain barrier without significant force that breaks several layers of tissue and bone. We have not seen any complications from Covid swabs in our neurology practice", says Dr Liz Coulthard, a committee member of the British Neuroscience Association (BNA).

The nasopharyngeal swab checks for coronavirus in the back of the nasal passage and is one of a range of swabbing techniques.

A combined nose-and-throat swab is routinely used to test for Covid-19 in the UK.

"I have swabbed many patients while working in hospital and also do these swabs on myself every week as a volunteer in a trial. It is unusual to have something that far up your nose - the swab can feel itchy or tickly but it shouldn't be painful," says Dr Tom Wingfield of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine.

The false claims started to emerge in US-based Facebook accounts on 6 July and some versions include calls to refuse testing altogether.

Some of these have been rated "false" by fact-checking organisations on Facebook.

We've found the same graphic appearing in Romanian, French, Dutch and Portuguese posts, each generating thousands of engagements.

Testing kits won't infect you with coronavirus
Reports of contaminated test kits have been misinterpreted to imply that taking a test will give you coronavirus.

In fact, headlines shared about contamination refer to a report on ineffective tests caused by sloppy lab practices at the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) early in the pandemic. This doesn't mean that being tested will give you the virus.

In a post shared more than 3,000 times on Facebook this week, a fan page for Fox News host Tucker Carlson shared a news article about contaminated test kits saying: "You want Covid-19? This is how U get it!"

The full Washington Post article, which was published in June, details the findings of a federal review which found that faulty tests and lab procedures caused delays to the rollout of the CDC's testing programme. It doesn't suggest that faulty test kits could have passed on the virus to any patients.

The article is behind a pay wall, which means most people seeing posts sharing the article would read the headline out of context.

Fact checkers in the US and India have debunked wilder claims that the coronavirus test is a plot funded by the Gates Foundation to implant a microchip into patients. These false claims, shared thousands of times on Facebook, are similar to conspiracy theories we looked into previously about a sinister micro-chipping programme linked to a potential vaccine.

There is no evidence to suggest there is any micro-chipping programme linked to the coronavirus pandemic and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has denied the claims.

'Why can't you just breathe on the swab?'
A meme asking, "If Covid was really carried on your breath, why can't you just breathe on the swab? Why do they have to shove the swab to the very back of your nose?" has been engaged with at least 7,000 times on Facebook and Instagram.

Coronavirus spreads when an infected person coughs or sneezes small droplets - packed with the virus - into the air. This doesn't mean that just breathing on a swab would collect enough material to conduct a laboratory test though.

We spoke to Public Health England about this who say taking a swab from inside the nose or throat yields more accurate test results.

If you only breathe on a slim swab head, you might not catch the viral particles or the cells that carry the virus. However, if you insert the swab in the nose and throat and rotate it at the site of infection, you are more likely to get infectious material that will yield a result.

Coronavirus symptoms: What are they and how do I protect myself?
Faking virus-free certificates in Bangladesh
Finally, we've taken a look at the growing scandal in Bangladesh of faked certificates indicating a person does not have coronavirus.

Several people have been arrested there for issuing bogus documentation showing negative test results to people who haven't actually been tested.

These documents have value because they are often required by migrant workers to show that they are virus-free when they arrive at their destination. Bangladesh relies heavily on income from its citizens working overseas.

In the latest incident, a hospital owner, accused of falsifying thousands of tests, was detained after a nine-day hunt near the Indian border, disguised as a woman.

Criminal gangs are also putting adverts on social media to find potential buyers.

Strangely, fake certificates indicating positive tests are also reported to be on sale in Bangladesh - offering up the chance for public servants to take leave from work.

Additional reporting by Olga Robinson and Shayan Sardarizadeh.

+

Coronavirus: The human cost of fake news in India
By Shruti Menon
BBC Reality Check
1 July 2020
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsReality Check
Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Fake or misleading news can have a real impact on those who find themselves the targets. This has been a particular problem in India during the coronavirus pandemic, where reliable sources of news are frequently drowned out by unverified information online.

False information has had serious consequences for minority communities as well as some business sectors such as the meat industry.

The Reality Check team has looked at the extent of this misinformation and some of those directly affected.

Religious tensions exposed
India's religious fault lines are an important theme across false stories spreading online, something that has been further highlighted by the coronavirus outbreak.

We've looked back at claims debunked by five Indian fact-checking websites between January and June this year.

They fall under four broad headings:

Coronavirus outbreak
February's Delhi riots
Citizenship Amendment Act
Claims about the Muslim minority
Of the 1,447 fact-checks on five Indian websites, claims around coronavirus dominated, making up 58% of them.

This was largely related to false cures, lockdown rumours and conspiracy theories about the origins of the virus.

In the period between January and early March (before the coronavirus outbreak took hold), fake news was dominated by the Citizenship Amendment Act, a new law that offers citizenship to people from three neighbouring countries, but only if they are not Muslim.

The law led to protests across the country by those who said it would marginalise Muslims.

Riots in mainly Muslim neighbourhoods in north-east Delhi in February also fuelled a lot of misleading claims around that time.

Delhi tense after deadly religious riots
This included doctored videos, fake images, the reusing of old videos and images in a different context, fake messages, and messages with fake attributions.

What happened when coronavirus hit India?
Our analysis found that misinformation targeting Muslims spiked in the first week of April.

This was after several members of an Islamic group called the Tablighi Jamaat, who had attended a religious gathering in Delhi, tested positive.

Islamophobia concerns after India mosque outbreak
As more members of the group tested positive, false claims about Muslims deliberately spreading the virus became viral.

In several parts of the country, there were calls for an economic boycott of Muslim businesses.

Vegetable seller Imran - who didn't want to use his real name - told the BBC that when a fake video on WhatsApp said to show a Muslim man spitting on bread went viral, calls for a boycott of Muslims grew.

"We were scared to enter villages where we would usually go to sell vegetables," said Imran, who lives in Uttar Pradesh state.

Imran and other vegetable vendors from his community now only sell their produce at a city market.

In the capital Delhi, the Minorities Commission, which works to safeguard the rights of minority communities, formally notified the police of the need to act against people stopping Muslims from entering residential areas or carrying on with their business.

"Not only people who were associated with the Tablighi Jamaat [were attacked], there were attacks on Muslims in all parts of India," Zafarul Islam, the chairman of the commission, told the BBC.

Meat traders targeted
False claims were also widely spread in India that eating vegetarian food and eliminating meat from your diet could prevent you getting coronavirus.

The government launched campaigns to stop the spread of such misinformation.

These false WhatsApp messages and social media posts had an impact on both Muslim and non-Muslim groups alike who were involved in the meat industry.

The Indian authorities made an assessment that by April, misinformation about meat-eating generally had contributed to losses of up to 130bn rupees (£1.43bn) in the poultry industry.

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Sales of chicken have fallen after misleading claims were made about eating meat
Poultry is one of the main forms of meat consumed in India.

"We were giving away chicken for free because we didn't know what to do with the stock," said Sujit Prabhavle, a meat trader in the western state of Maharashtra.

"Our sales fell by 80%," he said.

"I saw a message on WhatsApp that said eating chicken would spread coronavirus, so people stopped buying meat," said Touhid Baraskar, another meat seller from Maharashtra.

EASY STEPS: How to keep safe
A SIMPLE GUIDE: What are the symptoms?
CONTAINMENT: What it means to self-isolate
MAPS AND CHARTS: Visual guide to the outbreak
Some of the most viral false information has included fake claims that former top Indian cricketer Sachin Tendulkar had asked for meat shops to be shut.

"When misinformation comes from sources they trust, people will believe whatever comes their way without fact-checking it," said Pratik Sinha, founder of Alt-News, a fact-checking website.

The meat industry was not the only victim of fake news.

The fall in sales in the poultry industry had a major knock-on effect on the sale of eggs and of maize - which goes into much of the feed for chickens.

The sale of eggs fell by 30% in Delhi, 21% in Mumbai and by 52% in Hyderabad in Telangana state between January and June, according to official data.

Maize farmers are now selling their produce up to 35% lower than the mini

mum support price offered by the Indian government as a result of the fall in demand.

Data analysis by Shadab Nazmi in Delhi

+

Coronavirus: Has China or the US tested more?
By Reality Check team
BBC News
29 June 2020
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsReality Check
Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
US President Donald Trump says the US has done the "greatest testing" in the world - but Chinese state media says China has carried out three times more tests than the US.

So who's right?

Trump's claim
"We have more cases because we do the greatest testing... Other countries, they don't test millions."

The US has carried out almost 31 million coronavirus tests, according to the latest data.

That is more than any other Western country, but significantly less than China's reported total of over 90 million.

Exact testing comparisons can be difficult. Some countries count the number of people tested, while others count the total number of tests as someone can be tested several times if the first test doesn't work properly.

The US largely reports people tested, but some states report the total of tests carried out. China's reported total is of the number of tests conducted.

China's claim
"Throughout China, the number a week ago was 90.41 million, three times the number in the US."

In a tweet containing these figures, Hu Xijin, the editor-in-chief of the Global Times, a state media outlet, also called President Trump's claim that the US had carried out the most tests a "pure lie".

The Chinese National Health Committee's data, which is compiled by the Chinese government and cannot be independently verified, confirms, as of 22 June, China had conducted 90.41 million tests.

So the total is roughly three times the amount in the US, but China has a much larger population.

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Image caption
Millions of people have been tested in China's capital, Beijing.
Based on these figures, China has carried out about one test for every 15 people, compared with about one in 11 in the US. So that's slightly more per head of population in the US.

And China's testing has been more localised, with over a third of tests carried out in Beijing, Wuhan and the most populated province, Guangdong, according to local reports.

Timeline of the outbreak in China
Is the pandemic getting worse in the US?
Coronavirus: China's plan to test everyone in Wuhan
The methods of testing are also different in the two countries.

China's daily testing capacity has rapidly increased thanks to batch testing - grouping samples together and carrying out individual tests only if a batch proves positive.

Dr Anthony Fauci, the White House's top infectious disease expert, has said the US is "seriously considering" this method.

But it would work only in regions where the number of infections is low, as it is inefficient if a high proportion of the batches test positive.

+

Coronavirus: Why have there been so many outbreaks in meat processing plants?
By Anthony Reuben
BBC Reality Check
23 June 2020
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsReality Check
Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
Hundreds of workers have tested positive for coronavirus at meat processing plants and abattoirs.

They include a chicken processing site in Anglesey, where more than 150 workers have become infected with Covid-19, and plants in Wrexham and West Yorkshire.

There have also been major outbreaks in Germany, France, Spain and the US.

Bev Clarkson from the union Unite, says: "Unite has warned time and again that coronavirus outbreaks at meat processing factories throughout the UK were likely".

Why are meat workers getting coronavirus?
People get infected with coronavirus from droplets, which may be coughed, sneezed or exhaled by an infected person.

The infection may come through close contact with the person or by touching infected surfaces.

"Factories and, in particular, indoor areas which are cold and damp, are perfect environments for coronavirus to linger and spread," according to Lawrence Young, Professor of Molecular Oncology at the University of Warwick.

"Virus-containing droplets from infected individuals are more likely to spread, settle and stay viable."

Smithfield pork plant: The untold story of America's biggest outbreak
2 Sisters Anglesey: 158 factory staff have coronavirus
Five ways coronavirus is disrupting the food industry
Hundreds of abattoir workers test positive in Germany
Another possible factor in these refrigerated workplaces is noisy machinery, which requires people to talk more loudly or shout, which can increase the spread of infected droplets.

Image copyrightTOENNIES
What about working conditions?
It is difficult to keep workers two metres apart when they are working on fast-moving production lines, and the absence of daylight may also help the virus to survive.

"When you have people standing right next to each other working heavily - because of course this is a difficult job - and breathing heavily, you have a chance for spreading virus from just one infected individual to many that are in close proximity," said Tara Smith, professor of epidemiology at Kent State University in Ohio.

"And then of course you have a chain of dominoes after that."

There is no evidence that the meat products themselves could be a source of Covid-19 infection at the plants.

The Food Standards Agency said it was very unlikely that you could catch coronavirus from food because that is not how it is known to be transmitted.

Image copyrightGETTY IMAGES
It's not just conditions inside the plant that may be increasing the risk of coronavirus.

"Some of these factories have on-site or nearby accommodation where there are several people in each dormitory. They may be transported on a bus to the site of work, and they will be indoors together all day," said Michael Head, senior research fellow in global health at the University of Southampton.

The Unite union says that while it represents many workers in the meat processing sector, plants often employ migrant workers who may not be entitled to full sick pay, so could lose money if they self-isolate after getting sick.

The union says they often do not speak English as a first language and are worried about losing their jobs, so may be reluctant to raise concerns.

The British Meat Processors Association (BMPA) told Reality Check that most workers in its members' plants are full employees rather than agency staff.

What is being done to protect workers?
The government has issued guidelines on working safely in food manufacturing - including keeping workers at least two metres apart when possible.

The BMPA has also issued guidance, including cleaning factories more often than usual, isolating staff who develop symptoms and staggering start times and break times.

It also suggests providing additional personal protective equipment (PPE) such as visors, if available - staff in meat processing facilities usually wear PPE, but that does not necessarily include masks.

Dr Yvonne Doyle, medical director at Public Health England, said the organisation had been advising on a number of outbreaks in factories, some of which involved meat processing.

"Where outbreaks occur, we are working closely with NHS Test and Trace to ensure appropriate testing and tracing of contacts, both within and outside of the workplace. Where required, mobile testing units are being deployed to ensure large workforces are tested promptly."

Image copyrightTOENNIES
In Germany, the government is banning the outsourcing of abattoir staff - workers will have to be employed directly by the company.

A source close to Defra in the UK told the BBC that another of the factors being looked at in Germany is the poor training and poor language skills of the mainly Eastern European workforce in the meat processing industry, which was preventing the rules being followed.

A report from the Center for Disease Control in the US has recommended slowing production lines, putting physical barriers between staff, making everybody wear face coverings and ensuring that nobody would lose money because of self-isolating.

+

Coronavirus: Boris Johnson statement fact-checked
By Reality Check team
BBC News
17 July 2020
Share this with Facebook Share this with Messenger Share this with Twitter Share this with Email Share
Related TopicsReality Check
Image copyrightPA MEDIA
Boris Johnson gave a coronavirus briefing on Friday, accompanied by Lady Harding, who is in charge of the NHS test and trace system for England.

Here are some of the claims that were made:

1. Delivering PPE
Boris Johnson: "We have substantially increased the pipeline of personal protective equipment [PPE] for the NHS and social care constituting over 30 billion items of PPE over the course of the pandemic".

However, government figures show that only 2.3 billion items have actually been delivered to health and social care services in England, up to 12 July.

This includes 1.4 billion gloves (which are counted individually as opposed to in pairs).

It's not immediately clear where the 30 billion number comes from, but it could include future deliveries.

On 26 June, Lord Deighton who's leading the government's PPE efforts, said there were 28 billion items on order.

Adding that together with what has already been delivered would be just over 30 billion.

2. Test and trace getting better
Dido Harding: "Every week, NHS test and trace gets better."

But the proportion of people reached and asked to self-isolate in England has been falling since the scheme was launched six weeks ago.

Percentage of contacts traced
Source: DHSC
The first set of figures published were for 28 May to 10 June when 90.6% of identified contacts were traced.

The most recent figure for 1 July to 8 July was 71.1%, barely changed from the previous week.

Sage, which advises the government, has said that at least 80% of contacts would need to isolate for the test and trace system to be effective.

While the overall figure is above 80%, figures for the last three weeks have been below that level.

Another measure of success has increased somewhat. The proportion of infected people who were contacted after being referred to the contact tracers was 72.6% in the first set of data for 28 May to 10 June.

That figure deteriorated the following week, but has gradually improved since then and was 78.7% in the most recent set of figures.

Health officials also say data shows the majority of those testing positive were reached by NHS Test and Trace to identify their contacts in less than 24 hours.

You can read more about contact tracing here.

3. Ventilators in the NHS
Boris Johnson: "We have massively increased the number of mechanical ventilators available in the NHS across the UK from 9,000 before the pandemic to nearly 30,000 now."

This is correct.

There are now 29,800 mechanical ventilators available to the NHS, according to the Department of Health and Social Care.

On 17 March, the head of NHS England Sir Simon Stevens said there were 8,175 ventilators available, so it's reasonable to assume that including the rest of the UK, that would have been closer to 9,000.

The government had originally set a target of 30,000 ventilators, but this was later lowered to 18,000. This was because social distancing measures had lowered demand.

However, they have now almost reached that higher target.

Image copyrightPA MEDIA
4. Testing comparison with Europe
Boris Johnson: "Publicly available data suggests we are now carrying out our tests more than anywhere else in Europe in total, and more than Germany, France, Italy and Spain per capita."

Making international comparisons is difficult, as we have explained before. Some countries report the number of people tested, while others report the number of tests performed.

With these constraints in mind, Our World in Data website publishes a comparison of the number of daily tests performed across the world.

Based on an average daily figure over the last seven days, the UK performed 1.67 tests per 1,000 people a day, while Germany carried out 0.86 tests per 1,000, Italy 0.7 and Spain 0.63. Data for France is not available.

The only two countries in Europe that carried out more tests per capita were Denmark (with 2.11 tests per 1,000 people) and Luxembourg (12.77 per 1,000).

It absolute terms, the UK is now carrying out more tests than other European countries. According to yesterday's figures from the Department of Health and Social Care, there were 202,912 daily tests made available in the UK while 152,063 tests were processed.

5. Testing capacity
Boris Johnson: "Antigen test capacity has increased 100-fold since the start of March, from fewer than 2,000 tests a day to more than 200,000 tests a day now."

At the beginning of March, the government did not publish a daily testing capacity figure (the number of tests that could be done on a given day) but data released at the time shows that just under 2,000 people were tested for coronavirus on average each day.

On 11 March, NHS England announced that testing capacity would be increased from around 1,500 a day to 10,000.

Since then, the government has set numerous targets on both capacity and the actual number of daily tests.

It has been criticised by the UK Statistics Authority for its handling of testing data.

On 16 July more than 200,000 tests were made available with over 150,000 processed, so the prime minister is right that capacity increased 100-fold.